FIELD OF THE INVENTION
The present invention provides non-steroidal compounds which are selective modulators (i.e., agonists and antagonists) of a steroid receptor, specifically, the glucocorticoid receptor. The present invention also discloses pharmaceutical compositions containing these compounds and methods for using these compounds to treat animals requiring glucocorticoid receptor agonist and/or antagonist therapy. Glucocorticoid receptor modulators are useful to treat diseases, such as obesity, diabetes, inflammation and others as described below. The present invention also discloses intermediates and processes for preparing these compounds.
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
Nuclear receptors are classically defined as a family of ligand dependent transcription factors, that are activated in response to ligand binding (R.M. Evans, 240 Science, 889 (1988)). Members of this family include the following receptors: glucocorticoid, mineralocorticoid, androgen, progesterone and estrogen. Naturally occurring ligands to these receptors are low molecular weight molecules that play an important role in health and in many diseases. Excesses or deficiencies of these ligands can have profound physiological consequences. As an example, glucocorticoid excess results in Cushing's Syndrome, while glucocorticoid insufficiency results in Addison's Disease.
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is present in glucocorticoid responsive cells where it resides in the cytosol in an inactive state until it is stimulated by an agonist. Upon stimulation the glucocorticoid receptor translocates to the cell nucleus where it specifically interacts with DNA and/or protein(s) and regulates transcription in a glucocorticoid responsive manner. Two examples of proteins that interact with the glucocorticoid receptor are the transcription factors, API and NFκ-B. Such interactions result in inhibition of API- and NFκ-B- mediated transcription and are believed to be responsible for some of the anti-inflammatory activity of endogenously administered glucocorticoids. In addition, glucocorticoids may also exert physiologic effects independent of nuclear transcription. Biologically relevant glucocorticoid receptor agonists include cortisol and corticosterone. Many synthetic glucocorticoid receptor agonists exist including dexamethasone, prednisone and prednisilone. By definition, glucocorticoid receptor antagonists bind to the receptor and prevent glucocorticoid receptor agonists from binding and eliciting GR mediated events, including transcription. RU486 is an example of a non-selective glucocorticoid receptor antagonist.
U.S. Patent No. 3,683,091 discloses phenanthrene compounds, specifically certain di-7-hydroxy or methyl-2,3,4,4a,9,10-hexahydrophenanthren-2-one and 4a-alkyl derivatives, hydrogenated derivatives, functional derivatives and optically active isomers thereof useful as specific anti-acne agents.
Japanese Patent Application, Publication No. 45014056, published 20 May 1970, discloses the manufacture of 1,2,3,4,9,10,11α, 12-octahydro-7-methoxy-12β-butylphenanthren-2β-ol and certain of its derivatives useful as antiandrogenic and antianabolic drugs.
Japanese Patent Application, Publication No. 6-263688, published 20 September 1994, discloses certain phenanthrene derivatives which are interleukin-1 (IL-1) inhibitors. It also discloses their preparation and certain intermediates thereto. International Patent Application Publication No. WO 95/10266, published 20 April 1995, discloses the preparation and formulation of certain phenanthrene derivatives as nitrogen monoxide synthesis inhibitors.
Japanese Patent Application, Publication No. 45-36500, published 20 November 1970, discloses a method of making certain optically active phenanthrene derivatives which are useful as antiandrogenic agents.
European Patent Application, Publication No. 0 188 396, published 23 July 1986, discloses certain substituted steroid compounds, certain processes and intermediates for preparing them, their use and pharmaceutical compositions containing them. These compounds are disclosed to possess antiglucocorticoid activity, and some of them have glucocorticoid activity.
C.F. Bigge et al., J. Med. Chem. 1993, 36, 1977-1995, discloses the synthesis and pharmacolgical evaluation of a series of octahydrophenanthrenamines and certain of their heterocyclic analogues as potential noncompetitive antagonists of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor complex.
P.R. Kanjilal et al., J. Org. Chem. 1985, 50, 857-863, discloses synthetic studies toward the preparation of certain complex diterpenoids.
G. Sinha et al., J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. I (1983), (10), 2519-2528, discloses the synthesis of the isomeric bridged diketones cis-3,4,4a,9,10,10a-hexahydro-1,4a-ethanophenanthren-2(1H),12-dione and trans-3,4,4a,9,10,10a-hexahydro-3,4a-ethanophenanthren-2(1H),12-dione by highly regioselective intramolecular aldol condensations through the stereochemically defined cis- and trans-2,2-ethylenedioxy-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydrophenanthren-4a-ylacetaldehydes.
U.R. Ghatak, M. Sarkar and S.K. Patra, Tetrahedron Letters No. 32, pp. 2929-2931, 1978, discloses a simple stereospecific route to certain polycyclic bridged-ring intermediates useful in preparing some complex diterpenoids.
P.N. Chakrabortty et al., Indian J. Chem. (1974), 12(9), 948-55, discloses the synthesis of 1α-methyl-1β,4aβ-dicarboxy-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10aβ-octahydro-phenanthrene, an intermediate in the synthesis of certain diterpenoids and diterpene alkaloids, and of 1β,4aβ-dicarboxy-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10aα-octahydrophenanthrene.
E. Fujita et al., J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. I (1974), (1), 165-77, discloses the preparation of enmein from 5-methoxy-2-tetralone via ent-3-β,2-epoxy-3-methoxy-17-norkaurane-6α,16α-diol.
H. Sdassi et al., Synthetic Communications, 25(17), 2569-2573 (1995) discloses the enantioselective synthesis of (R)-(+)-4a-cyanomethyl-6-methoxy-3,4,9,10-tetrahydrophenanthren-2-one, which is a key intermediate in morphinan synthesis.
T. Ibuka et al., Yakugaku Zasshi (1967), 87(8), 1014-17, discloses certain alkaloids of menispermaceous plants.
Japanese Patent 09052899, dated 25 February 1997, discloses certain diterpene or triterpene derivatives which are leukotriene antagonists obtained by extraction from Tripterygium wilfordii for therapeutic use.
U.S. Patent No. 5,696,127 discloses certain nonsteroidal compounds, such as 5H-chromeno[3,4-f]quinolines, which are selective modulators of steroid receptors.
U.S. Patent No. 5,767, 113 discloses certain synthetic steroid compounds useful for concurrently activating glucocorticoid-induced response and reducing multidrug resistance.
Published European Patent Application 0 683 172, published 11 November 1995, discloses certain 11,21-bisphenyl-19-norpregnane derivatives having anti-glucocorticoid activity and which can be used to treat or prevent glucocorticoid-dependent diseases.
D. Bonnet-Delpon et al., Tetrahedron (1996), 52(1), 59-70, discloses certain CF3-substituted alkenes as good partners in Diels-Alder reactions with Danishefsky's diene and in 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions with certain nitrones and non-stabilized azomethine ylides.
International Patent Application Publication No. WO 98/26783, published 25 June 1998, discloses the use of certain steroid compounds with anti-glucocorticoid activity, with the exception of mifepristone, for preparing medicaments for the prevention or treatment of psychoses or addictive behavior.
International Patent Application Publication No. WO 98/27986, published 2 July 1998, discloses methods for treating non-insulin dependent Diabetes Mellitus (NIDDM), or Type II Diabetes, by administering a combination of treatment agents exhibiting glucocorticoid receptor type I agonist activity and glucocorticoid receptor type II antagonist activity. Treatment agents such as certain steroid compounds having both glucocorticoid receptor type I agonist activity and glucocorticoid receptor type II antagonist activity are also disclosed.
International Patent Application Publication No. WO 98/31702, published 23 July 1998, discloses certain 16-hydroxy-11-(substituted phenyl)-estra-4,9-diene derivatives useful in the treatment or prophylaxis of glucocorticoid dependent diseases or symptoms.
Published European Patent Application 0 903 146, published 24 March 1999, discloses that the steroid 21-hydroxy-6,19-oxidoprogesterone (21OH- 6OP) has been found to be a selective antiglucocorticoid and is used for the treatment of diseases associated with an excess of glucocorticoids in the body, such as the Cushing's syndrome or depression.
J. A. Findlay et al, Tetrahedron Letters No. 19, pp. 869-872, 1962, discloses certain intermediates in the synthesis of diterpene alkaloids.
Although there are glucocorticoid receptor therapies in the art, there is a continuing need for and a continuing search in this field of art for selective glucocorticoid receptor therapies. Thus, the identification of non-steroidal compounds which have specificity for one or more steroid receptors, but which have reduced or no cross-reactivity for other steroid or intracellular receptors, is of significant value in this field.
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
The present invention particularly provides:compounds of formula IIor pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds;wherein R1, is a) -(C2-C4)alkyl, b) -CH2-CH=CH2 or c) -phenyl;R2 is -OH;R3 is a) -(C1-C6)alkyl substituted with 0 or 1 CF3, b) -C≡C-CH3, c) -C≡C-Cl, d) -C≡C-CF3, e) -CH2O(C1-C3)alkyl substituted with 0 or 1 CF3, or f) -CF3;R10 is -OH or -CN.
Most particularly, the present invention provides:compounds of formula IIIor pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds;wherein R3 and R10 are as defined immediately above.
In addition, the present invention provides:compounds of formula IIor pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds;wherein R1 is a) -(C2-C4)alkyl, b) -CH2-CH=CH2 or c) -phenyl;R2 is -OH;R3 is a) -(C1-C6)alkyl substituted with 0 or 1 CF3, b) -C≡C-CH3, c) -C≡C-Cl, d) -C≡C-CF3, e) -CH2O(C1-C3)alkyl substituted with 0 or 1 CF3, or f) -CF3;R10 is -C(O)-NH-Z-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of a) pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl, b) pyrimidinyl,, c) pyrazinyl, d) morpholinyl and e) oxadiazolyl;Z is -(C0-C2) alkyl.
Most particularly, the present invention provides:compounds of Formula IIIor pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds;wherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3;R10 is as defined immediately above. Preferably, it provides a compound of formula III or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt thereof as follows: a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-CH2-(4-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is-C(O)-NH-CH2-(2-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-CH2-(3-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-(2-pyrazinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-CH2-(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -(CH2)2-CH3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-CH2-(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -(CH2)2-CH3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-CH2-(2-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -(CH2)2-CF3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-CH2-(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -CH3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-CH2-(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -CH3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-(3-pyridinyl); and a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -CF3 and R10 is -C(O)-NH-CH2-(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl).
In addition, the present invention provides:compounds of formula IIor pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds;wherein R1, is a) -(C2-C4)alkyl, b) -CH2-CH=CH2 or c) -phenyl;R2 is -OH;R3 is a) -(C1-C4)alkyl substituted with 0 or 1 CF3, b) -C≡C-CH3, c) -C≡C-Cl, d) -C≡C-CF3, e) -CH2O(C1-C3)alkyl substituted with 0 or 1 CF3, or f) -CF3;R10 is -O-(C1-C2)alkyl-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of a) pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl, b) pyrimidinyl, c) pyrazinyl, d) morpholinyl and f) oxadiazolyl.
Most particularly, the present invention provides:compounds of formula IIIor pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds;wherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3;R10 is -O-(C1-C2)alkyl-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of a) 2-pyridinyl, b) 3-pyridinyl, c) 4-pyridinyl, d) 2-methyl-3-pyridinyl and e) pyrazinyl. Preferably, it provides a compound of formula III and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof as follows: a compound of farmuta III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -O-CH2-(4-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -O-CH2-(2-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -(CH2)2-CF3 and R10 is -O-CH2-(3-pyridinyl); a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is -(CH2)2-CF3 and R10 is -O-CH2-(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -(CH2)2-CF3 and R10 is -O-CH2-(2-pyridinyl); and a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -CF3 and R10 is -O-CH2-(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl).
In addition, the present invention provides:compounds of formula IIor pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds;wherein R1, is a) -(C2-C4)alkyl, b) -CH2CH=CH2 or c) -phenyl;R2 is -OH;R3 is a) -(C1-C4)alkyl substituted with 0 or 1 CF3, b) -C≡C-CH3, c) -C≡C-Cl, d) -C≡C-CF3, e) -CH2O(C,-C3)alkyl substituted with 0 or 1 CF3,or f) -CF3;R10 is a) -O-Z-C(O)-NH-(C0-C3)alkyl-N((C1-C2)alkyl)2, b) -O-Z-C(O)-NR12R13, or c) -O-Z-C(O)-NH-(C0-C3 )alkyl-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of 1) pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl, 2) pyrimidinyl, 3) pyrazinyl. 4) morpholinyl, 5) pyrrolidinyl, 6) imidazolyl and 7) oxadiazolyl;R12 and R13 are independently a) -H or b) -(C1-C2)alkyl; or R12 and R13 are taken together with N to form pyrrolidinyl;Z is -(C0-C1) alkyl.
Most particularly, the present invention provides:compounds of formula IIIor pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds;wherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3;R10 is a) -O-C(O)-NH-(C0-C3)alkyl-N((C1-C2)alkyl)2, b) -O-C(O)-N(CH3)2, c) -O-C(O)-(1-pyrrolidinyl) or d) -O-C(O)-NH-(C0-C3)alkyl-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of 1) 2-pyridinyl, 2) 3-pyridinyl, 3) 4-pyridinyl, 4) 2-methyl-3-pyridinyl, 5) pyrazinyl, 6) morpholinyl, 7) pyrrolidinyl and 8) imidazolyl. Preferably, it provides a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -O-C(O)-NH-(CH2)2-(1-pyrrolidinyl); a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -O-C(O)-NH-(CH2)2- N(CH3)2; a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -O-C(O)-NH-CH2-2-pyridyl; a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -O-C(O)-NH-CH2-4-pyridyl; and a compound of formula III wherein R3 is -C≡C-CH3 and R10 is -O-C(O)-NH-CH2-3-pyridyl; and pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the above compounds.
The compounds of formula II and formula III may be used in methods of treating obesity in a mammal comprising administering to said mammal a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound. More particularly, the mammal is a female or male human. Also disclosed are pharmaceutical compositions comprising a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent.
Also disclosed are pharmaceutical compositions for the treatment of obesity comprising an obesity treating amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent.
Also disclosed are pharmaceutical combination compositions comprising: a therapeutically effective amount of a composition comprising:a first compound, said first compound being a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound;a second compound, said second compound being a β3 agonist, a thyromimetic agent, an eating behavior modifying agent or a NPY antagonist; and a pharmaceutical carrier, vehicle or diluent. More particularly, the second compound is orlistat or sibutramine.
Also disclosed are methods of treating obesity comprising administering to a mammal in need of such treatmentan amount of a first compound, said first compound being a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound;a second compound, said second compound being a β3 agonist, a thyromimetic agent, an eating behavior modifying agent or a NPY antagonist; andwherein the amounts of the first and second compounds result in a therapeutic effect. More particularly, the second compound is orlistat or sibutramine.
Also disclosed are kits comprising:a) a first compound, said first compound being a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent in a first unit dosage form;b) a second compound, said second compound being a β3 agonist, a thyromimetic agent, an eating behavior modifying agent or a NPY antagonist; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent in a second unit dosage form; andc) a container for containing said first and second dosage forms; wherein the amounts of said first and second compounds result in a therapeutic effect.
Also disclosed are methods of inducing weight loss in a mammal comprising administering to said mammal a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound. The present invention also provides pharmaceutical compositions for inducing weight loss comprising a weight loss-treating amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent.
Also disclosed are methods of treating diabetes in a mammal comprising administering to said mammal a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound.
Also disclosed are pharmaceutical compositions for the treatment of diabetes comprising a diabetes-treating amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent.
Also disclosed are pharmaceutical combination compositions comprising: a therapeutically effective amount of a composition comprising:a first compound, said first compound being a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound;a second compound, said second compound being an aldose reductase inhibitor, a glycogen phosphorylase inhibitor, a sorbitol dehydrogenase inhibitor, insulin, troglitazone, sulfonylureas, glipizide, glyburide, or chlorpropamide; anda pharmaceutical carrier, vehicle or diluent. More particularly, the aldose reductase inhibitor is 1-phthalazineacetic acid, 3,4-dihydro-4-oxo-3-[[5-trifluoromethyl)-2-benzothiazolyl]methyl]- or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt thereof.
Also disclosed are methods of treating diabetes comprising administering to a mammal in need of such treatmentan amount of a first compound, said first compound being a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound;a second compound, said second compound being an aldose reductase inhibitor, a glycogen phosphorylase inhibitor, a sorbitol dehydrogenase inhibitor, insulin, troglitazone, sulfonylureas, glipizide, glyburide, or chlorpropamide ; andwherein the amounts of the first and second compounds result in a therapeutic effect.
Also disclosed are pharmaceutical combination compositions comprising:therapeutically effective amounts of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; anda compound selected from the group consisting of a glucocorticoid receptor agonist, a cholinomimetic drug, an anti-Parkinson's drug, an antianxiolytic drug, an antidepressant drug and an antipsychotic drug; anda pharmaceutical carrier, vehicle or diluent. More particularly, the anti-Parkinson's drug is selected from the group consisting of L-dopa, bromocriptine and selegiline. More particularly, the antianxiolytic drug is selected from the group consisting of benzodiazepine, valium and librium. More particularly, the antidepressant drug is selected from the group consisting of desipramine, sertraline hydrochloride and fluoxetine hydrochloride. More particularly, the antipsychotic drug is selected from the group consisting of haloperidol and clozapine.
Also disclosed are kits comprising:a) a first compound, said first compound being a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent in a first unit dosage form;b) a second compound, said second compound being selected from the group consisting of a glucocorticoid receptor agonist; a cholinomimetic drug; an anti-Parkinson's drug; an antianxiolytic drug; an antidepressant drug; and an antipsychotic drug; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent in a second unit dosage form; andc) a container for containing said first and second dosage forms wherein the amounts of said first and second compounds result in a therapeutic effect. More particularly, it provides such kits wherein the anti-Parkinson's drug is selected from the group consisting of L-dopa, bromocriptine and selegiline. More particularly, it provides such kits wherein the antianxiolytic drug is selected from the group consisting of benzodiazepine, valium and librium. More particularly, it provides such kits wherein the antidepressant drug is selected from the group consisting of desipramine, sertraline hydrochloride and fluoxetine hydrochloride. More particularly, it provides such kits wherein the antipsychotic drug is selected from the group consisting of haloperidol and clozapine.
Also disclosed are methods of treating anxiety in a mammal comprising administering to said mammal a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound. Also disclosed are pharmaceutical compositions for the treatment of anxiety comprising an anxiety-treating amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent.
Also disclosed are methods of treating depression in a mammal comprising administering to said mammal a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound. It also provides pharmaceutical compositions for the treatment of depression comprising a depression-treating amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent.
Also disclosed are methods of treating neurodegeneration in a mammal comprising administering to said mammal a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound. Also disclosed are pharmaceutical compositions for the treatment of neurodegeneration comprising a neurodegeneration-treating amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent.
Also disclosed are the following methods: methods of affecting glucocorticoid receptor activity comprising administering to a mammal in need thereof a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; methods of modulating a process mediated by glucocorticoid receptor comprising administering to a mammal in need thereof a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; methods of treating a mammal requiring glucocorticoid receptor therapy comprising administering to said mammal a therapeutically effective amount of a glucocorticoid receptor modulator compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound.
Also disclosed are methods of treating an inflammatory disease in a mammal comprising administering to said mammal a therapeutically effective amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound. More particularly, the mammal is a female or male human.
Also disclosed are pharmaceutical compositions for the treatment of an inflammatory disease comprising an inflammatory-treating amount of a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound; and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.
Also disclosed are methods for the treatment of an inflammatory disease in a mammal which comprises: administering to said mammal therapeutically effective amounts of a glucocorticoid receptor modulator and a glucocorticoid receptor agonist. More particularly, such methods further comprise reducing the undesirable side effects of said treatment. Also disclosed are methods wherein the inflammatory disease is selected from the group consisting of arthritis, asthma, rhinitis and immunomodulation. More particularly, the glucocorticoid receptor modulator is a compound of formula II or formula III, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt of said compound. Also, more particularly, the glucocorticoid receptor agonist is a compound selected from the group consisting of prednisone, prednylidene, prednisolone, cortisone, dexamethasone and hydrocortisone.
Also disclosed is a process for preparing a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3; and R10 is -O-CH2-het wherein het is pyridinyl, substituted with 0 or 1 methyl;wherein R3 is as defined above, with a base in an aprotic solvent at room temperature to 200°C; and then with a compound of formula R10-X1 wherein R10 is as defined above and -X1 is halo, mesylate or tosylate. More particularly, it provides this process wherein the base is NaH, which comprises reacting a compound of formula III-At-butoxide or Et3N; and the solvent is DMF or THF.
Also disclosed is a process for preparing a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3; R10 is -C(O)-NH-Z-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of a) pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl, b) pyrimidinyl, c) pyrazinyl, d) morpholinyl and e) oxadiazolyl; and Z is -(C0-C1) alkyl,;wherein R3 is as defined above, with a coupling reagent and a compound of formula NH2-Z-het or a salt thereof wherein -Z and -het are as defined above in an aprotic solvent at 0 °C to 100° C. More particularly, it provides this process wherein the coupling reagent is selected from the group consisting of 1-(3-dimethylaminopropyl-3-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC), dicyclohexyl carbodiimide (DCC) and hydroxybenzotriazole hydrate (HOBt).which comprises reacting a compound of formula III-B
Also disclosed is a process for preparing a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡wherein R3 is as defined above, with a tri(C1-C4)alkyl-aluminum compound and a compound of formula NH2-Z-het wherein -Z and -het are as defined above in a solvent at 0 °C to 40 °C. More particularly, it provides this process wherein the tri(C1-C4)alkyl-aluminum compound is Al(CH3)3 and the solvent is methylene chloride.C-Cl or f) -CF3; R10 is -C(O)-NH-Z-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of a) pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl, b) pyrimidinyl, c) pyrazinyl, d) morpholinyl and e) oxadiazolyl; and Z is -(C0-C1) alkyl;which comprises reacting a compound of formula III-C
Also disclosed is a process for preparing a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3; R10 is a) -O-C(O)-N(CH3)2, b) -O-C(O)-(1-pyrrolidinyl) or c) -O-C(O)-NH-(C0-C3)alkyl-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of 1) 2-pyridinyl, 2) 3-pyridinyl, 3) 4-pyridinyl, 4) 2-methyl-3-pyridinyl, 5) pyrazinyl, 6) morpholinyl, 7) pyrrolidinyl and 8) imidazolyl;wherein R3 is as defined above, with phosgene or triphosgene in an aprotic solvent and then with a compound selected from the group consisting of NH(CH3)2, 1-pyrrolidinyl and NH2-(C0-C3)alkyl-het wherein het is as defined above at 0° C to room temperature. More particularly, it provides this process wherein the solvent is toluene.which comprises reacting a compound of formula III-A
Also disclosed is a process for preparing a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3; and R10 is -O-(C1-C2)alkyl-het wherein het is pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl;wherein R10 is as defined above, with R3-metal selected from the group consisting of R3Li, R3MgBr and R3MgCl wherein R3 is as defined above in an aprotic solvent at -78 °C to room temperature.which comprises reacting a compound of formula III-D
Also disclosed is a process for preparing a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is -CF3; and R10 is -O-(C1-C2)alkyl-het wherein het is pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl;wherein R10 is as defined above, with trimethylsilyl-CF3 in the presence of tert-butylammonium fluoride or cesium fluoride in a protic solvent; and b) hydrolyzing the resulting intermediate with tert-butylammonium fluoride or hydrochloric acid.which comprises a) reacting a compound of formula III-D
Also disclosed is a process for preparing a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3: R10 is -C(O)-NH-Z-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of a) pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl, b) pyrimidinyl, c) pyrazinyl, d) morpholinyt and e) oxadiazolyl; and Z for each occurrence is independently -(C0-C2) alkyl;wherein R10 is as defined above, with R3-metal selected from the group consisting of R3Li, R3MgBr and R3MgCl wherein R3 is as defined above in an aprotic solvent at -78 °C to room temperature.which comprises reacting a compound of formula III-D
Also disclosed is a process for preparing a compound of formula IIIwherein R3 is a) -(CH2)2-CF3, b) -(CH2)2-CH3, c) -CH3, d) -C≡C-CH3, e) -C≡C-Cl or f) -CF3; R10 is -C(O)-NH-Z-het wherein het is selected from the group consisting of a) pyridinyl substituted with 0 or 1 methyl, b) pyrimidinyl, c) pyrazinyl, d) morpholinyl and e) oxadiazolyl; and Z for each occurrence is independently -(C0-C2) alkyl;wherein R10 is as defined above, with trimethylsilyl-CF3 in the presence of tert-butylammonium fluoride or cesium fluoride in a protic solvent; and b) hydrolyzing the resulting intermediate with tert-butylammonium fluoride or hydrochloric acid.which comprises a) reacting a compound of formula III-D
DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION
The compounds of the present invention are named according to the IUPAC or CAS nomenclature system.
In one way of naming the compounds of the present invention, the carbon atoms in the ring may be numbered as shown in the following simplified structure:
Alternatively, another way of naming the compounds of the present invention, the carbon atoms in the ring may be numbered as shown in the following simplified structure:
The carbon atom content of various hydrocarbon-containing moieties is indicated by a prefix designating the minimum and maximum number of carbon atoms in the moiety, i.e., the prefix Ci-Cj indicates a moiety of the integer "i" to the integer "j" carbon atoms, inclusive. Thus, for example, C1-C3 alkyl refers to alkyl of one to three carbon atoms, inclusive, or methyl, ethyl, propyl and isopropyl, and all isomeric forms and straight and branched forms thereof.
Examples of alkyl of one to nine carbon atoms, inclusive, are methyl, ethyl, propyl, butyl, pentyl, hexyl, heptyl, octyl, and nonyl, and all isomeric forms and straight and branched thereof.
Examples of alkenyl of two to five carbon atoms, inclusive, are ethenyl, propenyl, butenyl, pentenyl, and all isomeric forms and straight and branched forms thereof.
Examples of alkynyl of two to five carbon atoms, inclusive, are ethynyl, propynyl, butynyl, pentynyl and all isomeric forms and straight and branched forms thereof.
The terms cycloalkyl, cycloalkenyl and cycloalkynyl refer to cyclic forms of alkyl, alkenyl and alkynyl, respectively. Exemplary (C3-C8)cycloalkyl groups are cyclopropyl, cyclobutyl, cyclopentyl, cyclohexyl, cycloheptyl and cyclooctyl.
The term halo includes chloro, bromo, iodo and fluoro.
The term aryl refers to an optionally substituted six-membered aromatic ring, including polyaromatic rings. Examples of aryl include phenyl, naphthyl and biphenyl.
The term het refers to an optionally substituted 5-, 6- or 7-membered saturated, partially saturated or unsaturated heterocyclic ring containing from 1 to 3 heteroatoms selected from the group consisting of nitrogen, oxygen and sulfur; and including any bicyclic group in which any of the above heterocyclic rings is fused to a benzene ring or another heterocyclic ring; and the nitrogen atom may be in the oxidized state giving the N-oxide form; and substituted by 0 to 3 independent substituents.
The following paragraphs describe exemplary ring(s) for the generic ring descriptions contained herein.
Exemplary five-membered rings are furyl, thienyl, 2H-pyrrolyl, 3H-pyrrolyl, pyrrolyl, 2-pyrrolinyl, 3-pyrrolinyl, pyrrolidinyl, 1,3-dioxolanyl, oxazolyl, thiazolyl, imidazolyl, 2H-imidazolyl, 2-imidazolinyl, imidazolidinyl, pyrazolyl, 2-pyrazolinyl, pyrazolidinyl, isoxazolyl, isothiazolyl, 1,2-dithiolyl, 1,3-dithiolyl, 3H-1,2-oxathiolyl, 1,2,3-oxadizaolyl, 1,2,4-oxadiazolyl, 1,2,5-oxadiazolyl, 1,3,4-oxadiazolyl, 1,2,3-triazolyl, 1,2,4-trizaolyl, 1,3,4-thiadiazolyl, 1,2,3,4-oxatriazolyl, 1,2,3,5-oxatrizaolyl, 3H-1,2,3-dioxazolyl, 1,2,4-dioxazolyl, 1,3,2-dioxazolyl, 1,3,4-dioxazolyl, 5H-1,2,5-oxathiazolyl and 1,3-oxathiolyl.
Exemplary six-membered rings are 2H-pyranyl, 4H-pyranyl, pyridinyl, piperidinyl, 1,2-dioxinyl, 1,3-dioxinyl, 1,4-dioxanyl, morpholinyl, 1,4-dithianyl, thiomorpholinyl, pyridazinyl, pyrimidinyl, pyrazinyl, piperazinyl, 1,3,5-triazinyl, 1,2,4-triazinyl, 1,2,3-trizainyl, 1,3,5-trithianyl, 4H-1,2-oxazinyl, 2H-1,3-oxazinyl, 6H-1,3-oxazinyl, 6H-1,2-oxazinyl, 1,4-oxazinyl, 2H-1,2-oxazinyl, 4H-1,4-oxazinyl, 1,2,5-oxathiazinyl, 1,4-oxazinyl, o-isoxazinyl, p-isoxazinyl, 1,2,5-oxathiazinyl, 1,2,6-oxathiazinyl, 1,4,2-oxadiazinyl and 1,3,5,2-oxadiazinyl.
Exemplary seven-membered rings are azepinyl, oxepinyl, thiepinyl and 1,2,4-diazepinyl.
Exemplary eight membered rings are cyclooctyl, cyclooctenyl and cyclooctadienyl.
Exemplary bicyclic rings consisting of combinations of two fused partially saturated, fully saturated or fully unsaturated five or six membered rings, taken independently, optionally having one to four heteroatoms selected independently from nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen are indolizinyl, indolyl, isoindolyl, 3H-indolyl, 1H-isoindolyl, indolinyl, cyclopenta(b)pyridinyl, pyrano(3,4-b)pyrrolyl, benzofuryl, isobenzofuryl, benzo(b)thienyl, benzo(c)thienyl, 1H-indazolyl, indoxazinyl, benzoxazolyl, anthranilyl, benzimidazolyl, benzthiazolyl, purinyl, 4Hquinolizinyl, quinolinyl, isoquinolinyl, cinnolinyl, phthalazinyl, quinazolinyl, quinoxalinyl, 1,8-naphthyridinyl, pteridinyl, indenyl, isoindenyl, naphthyl, tetralinyl, decalinyl, 2H-1-benzopyranyl, pyrido(3,4-b)-pyridinyl, pyrido(3,2-b)-pyridinyl, pyrido(4,3-b)-pyridinyl, 2H-1,3-benzoxazinyl, 2H-1,4-benzoxazinyl, 1H-2,3-benzoxazinyl, 4H-3,1-benzoxazinyl, 2H-1,2-benzoxazinyl and 4H-1,4-benzoxazinyl.
As used herein the term "mammals" is meant to refer to all mammals, including, for example, primates such as humans and monkeys. Examples of other mammals included herein are rabbits, dogs, cats, cattle, goats, sheep and horses.
The term "treating", "treat" or "treatment" as used herein includes preventative (e.g., prophylactic) and palliative treatment.
By "pharmaceutically acceptable" it is meant the carrier, vehicle, diluent, excipient and/or salt must be compatible with the other ingredients of the formulation, and not deleterious to the recipient thereof.
The expression "prodrug" refers to compounds that are drug precursors which following administration, release the drug in vivo via some chemical or physiological process (e.g., a prodrug on being brought to the physiological pH or through enzyme action is converted to the desired drug form).
The compounds of Formula II of the present invention are prepared as described in the Schemes, Preparations and Examples below, or are prepared by methods analogous thereto, which are readily known and available to one of ordinary skill in light of this disclosure. In each of the Schemes, the R groups (e.g., R1, R2, etc... ) correspond to those noted in the Summary above. In addition, the variable n is defined as 0 to 6. However, it will be understood by those skilled in the art that other functionalities disclosed herein at the indicated positions of compounds of Formula I also comprise potential substituents for the analogous positions on the structures within the Schemes.
The compound of formula A-1 (prepared as described in Org. Syn. 1971, 51, 109-112) (wherein R10 is halogen, hydrogen, methyl ether, or benzyl ether or is as described in the Summary above, and the other variables are as described in the Summary above) is reacted with a nitrogen-containing base, such as pyrrolidine, piperidine or morpholine, at a refluxing temperature in an aprotic solvent such as toluene, benzene, dichloromethane or dioxane, and then reacted with the alkylating agent of formula R1CH2-X1 wherein R1CH2- is (C2-C4)alkyl straight chain or an isopropyl, t-butyl or benzyl group or is as described in the Summary above, and X1 is a leaving group (see Francis A. Carey, in Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part A, Chapter 5.6 for examples) in dioxane, methanol, ethanol, isopropanol, DMF, DMSO or THF to give the compound of formula A-2. Typical alkylating agents are primary, secondary, benzylic or allylic halides and are preferably alkyl bromides or alkyl iodides.
Alternatively, the compound of formula A-1 is converted to its anion with a strong base, such as sodium hydride, sodium methoxide, lithium diisopropylamide, lithium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide, potassium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide, potassium t-butoxide or others, in an aprotic solvent, such as dimethylformamide (DMF) or tetrahydrofuran (THF). This reaction is conducted at -78 °C to room temperature depending on the nature of the base used. The resulting anion is alkylated with the appropriate alkylating agent of formula R1CH2-X1 as defined previously to give the compound of formula A-2.
Alternatively, the compound of formula A-1 is reacted with R1CH2-CHO and a base, such as pyrrolidine or an acid, such as acetic acid or hydrochloric acid, in a solvent such as toluene, benzene, methanol or ethanol. The intermediate thus obtained is then hydrogenated using a palladium on carbon catalyst or numerous other reagents such as platinum oxide or rhodium on aluminum oxide (see P.N. Rylander in Hydrogenation Methods, Academic Press, New York, 1985; Herbert O. House in Modern Synthetic Reactions, Chapter 1, pp. 1-45; and John Fried and John A. Edwards in Organic Reactions in Steroid Chemistry, Chapter 3, pp. 111-145) to give the compound of formula A-2. Alternatively, the intermediate is reacted with a reducing metal reagent, such as an alkali (group IA in the periodic table) or alkaline metal (group IIA in the periodic table), including Li, Na, or Ca, and an amine, such as NH3 or ethylene diamine, in an aprotic solvent, such as THF or dioxane, at -78 °C to room temperature to give the compound of formula A-2.
The compound of formula A-2 is reacted with (R)-(+)-α-methylbenzylamine (as shown in Scheme A-2) or (S)-(-)-α-methylbenzylamine (as shown in Scheme A-1) and an electrophile of formula A-6, in an aprotic solvent such as toluene to give the C2-S or C2-R substituted intermediates of formula A-2a, as shown in Schemes A-1 and A-2. These intermediates of formula A-2a may be ring closed or ring opened as illustrated in the schemes.
Alternatively, the compound of formula A-2 is reacted with an electrophile of formula A-6 and a base, such as sodium methoxide or KOH, in a solvent, such as methanol, to give a racemic mixture of the intermediates of formula A-2a of Schemes A-1 and A-2. This reaction may also give directly a racemic mixture of the products A-3a of Schemes A-1 and A-2, which mixture may be resolved by chiral HPLC or by other literature methods.
The resulting intermediate of formula A-2a is reacted with a base, such as sodium methoxide or KOH, in a solvent, such as methanol, or is reacted with an acid such as p-toluenesulfonic acid in a solvent such as toluene to give the compound of formula A-3a, wherein the variables are as defined in the Summary above and wherein R10 is halogen, hydrogen, methyl ether, or benzyl ether or is as described in the Summary above.
Alternatively, the compounds of formula A-3a are prepared from the compound of formula A-2a by other reported, annulation methods, some of which are described in M.E. Jung, Tetrahedron, 1976, 32, pp. 3-31.
The compound of formula A-3a wherein R10 is, for example, methoxy is reacted with BBr3 or BCl3 and tetrabutylammonium iodide or dimethylboron bromide in an aprotic solvent, such as dichloromethane or toluene at -78°C to room temperature to give the compound of formula A-3a wherein R10 is, for example, hydroxy.
Alternatively, the compound of formula A-3a wherein R10 is, for example, methoxy is reacted with sodium ethanethiol in DMF or is reacted with methionine in methanesulfonic acid to give the compound of formula A-3a wherein R10 is, for example, hydroxy.
Also, the compound of formula A-3a wherein R10 is, for example, hydroxy may be prepared by other literature methods as described in Protecting Groups in Organic Synthesis, Second Edition, T. W. Greene and P. G. M. Wuts, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. (1991) or as illustrated in Comprehensive Organic Transformation, R. C. Larock, VCH Publishers Inc. (1989) pp. 501-527.
The compound of formula A-3a wherein R10 is halogen, hydrogen, methyl ether, or hydroxy or is as described in the Summary above is hydrogenated with a palladium on carbon catalyst or other reagents such as platinum oxide or rhodium on aluminum oxide (see P.N. Rylander in Hydrogenation Methods, Academic Press, New York, 1985; Herbert O. House in Modern Synthetic Reactions, Chapter 1, pp. 1-45; and John Fried and John A. Edwards in Organic Reactions in Steroid Chemistry, Chapter 3, pp. 111-145) in a variety of solvents including methanol, ethanol, and THF to yield the compound of formula A-4a or A-5a wherein the variables are as described in the Summary above and wherein the cis compounds are the major products.
The compound of formula A-3a wherein R10 is hydrogen, methyl ether, hydroxy or is as described in the Summary above is reacted with a reducing metal reagent, such as an alkali (group IA in the periodic table) or alkaline metal (group IIA in the periodic table), including Li, Na, or Ca, and an amine, such as NH3 or ethylene diamine, in an aprotic solvent, such as THF or dioxane, at -78 °C to room temperature to give the compound of formula A-5a or A-4a wherein the variables are as described in the Summary above and wherein the trans compounds are the major products.
Alternatively, as shown in Scheme A-3, for example, the compound of formula A-3a of Scheme A-1 wherein R10 is halogen, hydrogen, methyl ether, hydroxy, carboxyl, or is as described in the Summary above is treated with an alcohol or diol, such as methanol or ethylene glycol, and a strong acid, such as p-toluenesulfonic acid, in an aprotic solvent, such as toluene or benzene, to form a ketal intermediate of formula A-6 wherein Ra is lower alkyl or wherein the Ra's taken together with the two oxygen atoms form, for example, 1,3-dioxolane and wherein the other variables are as defined in the Summary above. Alternatively, this ketal intermediate may be prepared by other literature methods such as those described in Protecting Groups in Organic Synthesis, Second Edition, T. W. Greene and P. G. M. Wuts, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. (1991). The ketal intermediate is hydrogenated using Pd(OH)2 on carbon or other reagents, such as platinum oxide or rhodium on aluminum oxide (see P.N. Rylander in Hydrogenation Methods, Academic Press, New York, 1985; Herbert O. House in Modern Synthetic Reactions, Chapter 1, pp. 1-45; and John Fried and John A. Edwards in Organic Reactions in Steroid Chemistry, Chapter 3, pp. 111-145) in a solvent such as toluene from 15-2000 psi (which is about 1 to about 133 atm) H2 at room temperature to 100ºC. The resultant intermediate of formula A-7 is then reacted with an acid, such as p-toluenesulfonic acid, in acetone or is reacted using various literature methods, such as those described in Protecting Groups in Organic Synthesis, Second Edition, T. W. Greene and P. G. M. Wuts, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. (1991), to yield the compound of formula A-5a of Scheme A-1 wherein R10 is halogen, hydrogen, methyl ether, hydroxy or is as described in the Summary above, and the other variables are as defined in the Summary above. The corresponding stereoisomers of these compounds are prepared by procedures analogous to those described above.
Alternatively, as shown in Scheme A-3, for example, the compound of formula A-3a of Scheme A-1 wherein R10 is halogen, hydrogen, methyl ether, hydroxy or is as described in the Summary above, is reacted with triethylorthoformate and p-toluenesulfonic acid in ethanol or toluene to form an enol ether intermediate of formula A-8 wherein Ra1 is ethyl or other acyclic or cyclic lower alkyl or acyl, depending on the reagent used, and the other variables are as defined in the Summary above. Alternatively, this enol ether intermediate may be prepared by other literature methods such as those described in Protecting Groups in Organic Synthesis, Second Edition, T. W. Greene and P. G. M. Wuts, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. (1991). The enol ether intermediate is then hydrogenated using Pd on CaCO3 or other reagents, such as platinum oxide or rhodium on aluminum oxide (see P.N. Rylander in Hydrogenation Methods, Academic Press, New York, 1985, Herbert O. House in Modern Synthetic Reactions, Chapter 1 pp. 1-45, and John Fried and John A. Edwards in "Organic Reactions in Steroid Chemistry," Chapter 3 pp. 111-145) in a variety of solvents including ethanol, methanol, and THF at 15-60 psi H2 pressure.
The resulting intermediate of formula A-9 is then reacted with an acid such as aqueous HCl, in a protic solvent, such as ethanol, or is reacted under other literature conditions, such as those described in Protecting Groups in Organic Synthesis, Second Edition, T. W. Greene and P. G. M. Wuts, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. (1991), to yield the compound of formula A-5a of Scheme A-1 wherein R10 is halogen, hydrogen, methyl ether, hydroxy or is as described in the Summary above, and the other variables are as defined in the Summary above. The corresponding stereoisomers of these compounds are prepared by procedures analogous to those described above.
Alternatively, in Schemes A-1 and A-2, the compounds of formula A-5a are prepared from the compounds of formula A-3a by other reported reduction methods, some of which are described in P. Jankowski, S. Marczak, J. Wicha, Tetrahedron, 1998, 12071-12150.
The compound of formula C-1 is treated with an acid scavenger, such as 2,6-lutidine, diisopropylethylamine, or potassium carbonate, with a trifluoromethylsulfonylation reagent, such as trifluoromethylsulfonic anhydride, N-phenyltrifluoromethane-sulfonamide, or 4-nitrophenyltrifluoromethanesulfonate, with or without a catalyst, such as 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP), in a solvent, such as dichloromethane, DMF or methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP), from -78 °C to room temperature to obtain the compound of formula C-2 wherein R10 is -OS(O)2CF3. Throughout this scheme, the other variables are as defined in the Summary above. Alternatively, the above compounds of formula C-2 are prepared from the compound of formula C-1 by other reported fluoroalkylsulfonylation methods, some of which are described in K. Ritter, Synthesis, 1993, pp. 735-762.
The compound of formula C-2 wherein the group at the R10 position is - OS(O)2CF3 or a halogen is reacted with metalcyanide, preferably zinc(II)cyanide (Zn(CN)2), and with a palladium source, such as tetrakis(triphenylphosphine) palladium(O) (Pd(PPh3)4), palladium(II)acetate, or tris(dibenzylidenacetone) dipalladium(O), in a solvent such as N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP), DMF or acetonitrile, at room temperature to 120 °C to give the cyano-substituted compound of formula C-3.
The compound of formula C-2 is reacted under CO 1-3 atm, with a catalyst such as palladium acetate (Pd(OAc)2) and 1,1'-bis(diphenylphospino)ferrocene (DPPF) or bis(diphenylphosphino)propane (DPPP), tetrakis(triphenylphosphine) palladium(O) (Pd(PPh3)4), or tris(dibenzylidenacetone) dipalladium(O), and a base, such as triethylamine or potassium carbonate, with an alcohol, such as methanol, ethanol, or benzyl alcohol, in a solvent, such as DMF, NMP, or DMSO, at room temperature to 150 °C, depending on the nature of the solvent used, to give the ester of formula C-5, wherein Rc is, for example, alkyl or aryl.
An aqueous base, such as KOH, in a solvent, such as THF, is added to a solution of the compound of formula C-5 in a solvent, such as THF. The resulting solution is stirred at room temperature to reflux to give the acid of formula C-6.
The compound of formula C-6 is treated with a coupling reagent, such as 1,3-dimethylaminopropyl-3-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC) or dicyclohexyl carbodiimide (DCC) and hydroxybenzotriazole hydrate (HOBt), with or without a catalyst, such as 4-dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP), and an amine, R12R13NH, in an aprotic solvent, such as dichloromethane or DMF, at 0 °C to room temperature to give the amide of formula C-8 wherein R12 and R13 are H and -Z-Het as defined in the Summary above. Also, the compounds of formula C-8 can be prepared from the compounds of formula C-6 by other reported, coupling methods, such as those described in Comprehensive Organic Transformation, R.C. Larock, VCH Publishers Inc. (1989), p 972-988.
Alternatively, the ester of formula C-5 is added to a mixture of trimethylaluminium (Al(CH3)3) and R12R13NH in a solvent, such as dichloromethane, dichloroethane (DCE), or toluene at 0°C to room temperature. The resulting mixture is stirred at room temperature to reflux to obtain the amide of formula C-8.
The compound of formula H-1 wherein the variables are as described in the Summary above (which is prepared by the procedures in Scheme A above) is reacted with trimethylsulfonium iodide ((CH3)3S+I-) or trimethylsulfoxonium iodide ((CH3)3S+→Ol-) and a base, such as potassium t-butoxide, in an aprotic solvent such as DMF to give the compound of formula H-5 wherein the variables are as defined in the Summary above. Alternatively, the compound of formula H-5 is obtained from the compound of formula H-1 by an analogous method to that illustrated in Comprehensive Organic Transformation, R. C. Larock, VCH Publishers Inc. (1989), pup. 468-470.
The compound of formula H-1 is reacted with R3-Metal, such as R3Li, R3MgBr or R3MgCl, wherein R3 is, for example, alkynyl or alkyl in an aprotic solvent such as THF at low temperature to give the compound of formula H-6 wherein R3 is alkynyl or alkyl and the other variables are as defined in the Summary above.
The compound of formula H-1 is reacted with TMSCF3 and TBAF as described in G.A. Olah et al., J.Am.Chem.Soc. (1989) 111, 393, to give the compound of formula H-6 wherein R3 is -CF3 and the other variables are as defined in the Summary above. Alternatively, the compound of formula H-1 is treated with other -CF3 nucleophiles which are known and available in the literature including, but not limited to, that disclosed by J. Russell, N. Roques, Tetrahedron, 1998, 54, 13771-13782.
Alternatively, the compound of formula H-5, wherein the variables are as defined in the Summary above, is reacted with R3-Metal such as R3Li, R3MgBr, or R3MgCl wherein R3 is, for example, alkyl in an aprotic solvent such as THF at low temperature to give the compound of formula H-6 wherein R3 is, for example, -CH2-alkyl, and the other variables are as defined in the Summary above. Alternatively, the compound of formula H-5 wherein the variables are as defined in the Summary above is reacted with R3-X-Metal, such as R3ONa, R3OK, or R3OLi wherein R3 is, for example, alkynyl and X is O in an aprotic solvent such as THF, at room temperature to the refluxing temperature of the solvent used, to give the compound of the formula H-6 wherein R3 is, for example, -O-CH2-alkynyl and the other variables are as defined in the Summary above.
The compound of formula H-6 wherein R3 is alkynyl and the other variables are as defined in the Summary above is reacted with H2, Pd/C, or PtO2 to give the corresponding saturated alkyl product.
Some of the preparation methods useful for the preparation of the compounds described herein may require protection of remote functionality (e.g., primary amine, secondary amine, carboxyl in Formula II precursors). The need for such protection will vary depending on the nature of the remote functionality and the conditions of the preparation methods. The need for such protection is readily determined by one skilled in the art. The use of such protection/deprotection methods is also within the skill in the art. For a general description of protecting groups and their use, see T.W. Greene, Protective Groups in Organic Synthesis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1991.
The subject invention also includes isotopically-labelled compounds, which are identical to those recited in Formula II, but for the fact that one or more atoms are replaced by an atom having an atomic mass or mass number different from the atomic mass or mass number usually found in nature. Examples of isotopes that can be incorporated into compounds of the invention include isotopes of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine and chlorine, such as 2H, 3H, 13C, 14C, 15N, 16O, 17O, 16F, and 36Cl, respectively. Compounds of the present invention, and pharmaceutically acceptable salts of said compounds which contain the aforementioned isotopes and/or other isotopes of other atoms are within the scope of this invention. Certain isotopically-labelled compounds of the present invention, for example those into which radioactive isotopes such as 3H and 14C are incorporated, are useful in drug and/or substrate tissue distribution assays. Tritiated, i.e., 3H, and carbon-14, i.e., 14C, isotopes are particularly preferred for their ease of preparation and detectability. Further, substitution with heavier isotopes such as deuterium, i.e., 2H, can afford certain therapeutic advantages resulting from greater metabolic stability, for example increased in vivo half-life or reduced dosage requirements and, hence, may be preferred in some circumstances. Isotopically labelled compounds of Formula II of this invention can generally be prepared by carrying out the procedures disclosed in the Schemes and/or in the Examples below, by substituting a readily available isotopically labelled reagent for a non-isotopically labelled reagent.
Any of the compounds of the present invention can be synthesized as pharmaceutically acceptable salts for incorporation into various pharmaceutical compositions. As used herein, pharmaceutically acceptable salts include, but are not limited to, hydrochloric, hydrobromic, hydroiodic, hydrofluoric, sulfuric, sulfonic, citric, camphoric, maleic, acetic, lactic, nicotinic, nitric, succinic, phosphoric, malonic, malic, salicyclic, phenylacetic, stearic, palmitic, pyridine, ammonium, piperazine, diethylamine, nicotinamide, formic, fumaric, urea, sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, zinc, lithium, cinnamic, methylamino, methanesulfonic, picric, p-toluenesulfonic, naphthalenesulfonic, tartaric, triethylamino, dimethylamino, and tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane. Additional pharmaceutically acceptable salts would be apparent to one of ordinary skill in the art. Where more than one basic moiety exists, the expression includes multiple salts (e.g., di-salt).
Some of the compounds of this invention are acidic and they form a salt with a pharmaceutically acceptable cation. Some of the compounds of this invention are basic and they form a salt with a pharmaceutically acceptable anion. All such salts, including di-salts, are within the scope of this invention and they can be prepared by conventional methods. They can be prepared simply by contacting the acidic and basic entities, in either an aqueous, non-aqueous or partially aqueous medium. For example, the mesylate salt is prepared by reacting the free base form of the compound of Formula II with methanesulfonic acid under standard conditions. Likewise, the hydrochloride salt is prepared by reacting the free base of the compound of Formula II with hydrochloric acid under standard conditions. The salts are recovered either by filtration, by precipitation with a non-solvent followed by filtration, by evaporation of the solvent, or, in the case of aqueous solutions, by lyophilization, as appropriate.
In addition, when the compounds of the present invention form hydrates or solvates, they are also within the scope of the present invention.
The compounds of the present invention also includes racemates, stereoisomers and mixtures of these compounds, including isotopically-labeled and radio-labeled compounds. Such isomers can be isolated by standard resolution techniques, including fractional crystallization and chiral column chromatography.
For instance, the compounds of the present invention have asymmetric carbon atoms and are therefore enantiomers or diastereomers. Diasteromeric mixtures can be separated into their individual diastereomers on the basis of their physical/chemical differences by methods known in the art, for example, by chromatography and/or fractional crystallization. Enantiomers can be separated by converting the enantiomeric mixture into a diasteromeric mixture by reaction with an appropriate optically active compound (e.g., alcohol), separating the diastereomers and converting (e.g., hydrolyzing) the individual diastereomers to the corresponding pure enantiomers. All such isomers, including diastereomers, enantiomers and mixtures thereof are considered as part of this invention.
The following configurations of the compounds of the present invention (as represented by simplified structures) are preferred, with the first configuration being more preferred:
Also, the compounds of the present invention can exist in several tautomeric forms, including the enol form, the keto form and mixtures thereof. All such tautomeric forms are included within the scope of the present invention.
The GR agonists, partial agonists and antagonists of the present invention can be used to influence the basic, life sustaining systems of the body, including carbohydrate, protein and lipid metabolism, electrolyte and water balance, and the functions of the cardiovascular, kidney, central nervous, immune, skeletal muscle and other organ and tissue systems. In this regard, GR modulators are used for the treatment of diseases associated with an excess or a deficiency of glucocorticoids in the body. As such, they may be used to treat the following: obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, Syndrome X, depression, anxiety, glaucoma, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), neurodegeneration (for example, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's), cognition enhancement, Cushing's Syndrome, Addison's Disease, osteoporosis, frailty, inflammatory diseases (such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, asthma and rhinitis), tests of adrenal function, viral infection, immunodeficiency, immunomodulation, autoimmune diseases, allergies, wound healing, compulsive behavior, multi-drug resistance, addiction, psychosis, anorexia, cachexia, post-traumatic stress syndrome, post-surgical bone fracture, medical catabolism and prevention of muscle frailty.
The compounds of the present invention, isomers, prodrugs and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof are useful to induce weight loss in mammals needing or desiring to lose weight. While not intending to limit the present invention to a specific mechanism of action, the compounds of the present invention, isomers, prodrugs and salts thereof are able to induce weight loss by a variety of mechanisms, such as appetite suppression, decreasing food intake, and stimulation of the metabolic rate in peripheral tissue, thereby increasing energy expenditure. In addition, the compounds of the present invention, isomers, prodrugs and salts thereof are useful to induce a more favorable partitioning of nutrients from fat to muscle tissue in mammals. Thus, while not necessarily resulting in weight loss, this increase in muscle mass may be useful in preventing or treating diseases, such as obesity and frailty.
In addition, the compounds of the present invention, isomers, prodrugs and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof may also be useful to increase lean meat deposition, improve lean meat to fat ratio, and trim unwanted fat from non-human animals, as described further below.
It will be understood by those skilled in the art that while the compounds and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof of the present invention will typically be employed as selective agonists, partial agonists or antagonists, there may be instances where a compound with a mixed steroid receptor profile is preferred.
Furthermore, it will be understood by those skilled in the art that the compounds and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof of the present invention, including pharmaceutical compositions and formulations containing these compounds and salts can be used in a wide variety of combination therapies to treat the conditions and diseases described above. Thus, the compounds and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof of the present invention can be used in conjunction with other pharmaceutical agents for the treatment of the disease/conditions described herein. For example, they may be used in combination with pharmaceutical agents that treat obesity, diabetes, inflammatory disease, immunodefficiency, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, viral infection, HIV, Alzheimers's disease, Parkinson's disease, anxiety, depression, or psychosis. In combination therapy treatment, both the compounds and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof of this invention and the other drug therapies are administered to mammals (e.g., humans, male or female) by conventional methods.
For instance, glucocorticoid receptor agonists are efficacious agents for the treatment of various inflammatory diseases; however, treatment is often accompanied by undesirable side effects. These side effects include, but are not limited to, the following examples: metabolic effects, weight gain, muscle wasting, decalcification of the skeleton, osteoporosis, thinning of the skin and thinning of the skeleton. However, according to the present disclosure, glucocorticoid receptor modulators may be used in combination with glucocorticoid receptor agonists to block some of these side effects, without inhibiting the efficacy of the treatment. Thus, any glucocorticoid receptor agonist may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of the present disclosure. This combination includes the treatment of various inflammatory diseases, such as arthritis (osteo and rheumatiod), asthma, rhinitis, or immunomodulation. Examples of glucocorticoid receptor modulators include those known in the art (many of which are described above) as well as the novel compounds of formula II of the present invention. More particularly, examples of glucocorticoid receptor modulators known in the art include, but are not limited to, certain nonsteroidal compounds, such as 5H-chromeno[3,4-f]quinolines, which are selective modulators of steroid receptors, as disclosed in U.S. Patent No. 5,696,127; and certain steroid compounds substituted at position 10, which possess antiglucocorticoid activity, and some of which have glucocorticoid activity, as disclosed in Published European Patent Application 0 188 396, published 23 July 1986. Examples of glucocorticoid receptor agonists include those known in the art, such as prednisone (17,21-dihydroxypregnane-1,4-diene-3,11,20-trione), prednylidene ((11β)-11,17,21-trihydroxy-16-methylenepregna-1,4-diene-3,20-dione), prednisolone ((11β)-11,17,21-trihydroxypregna-1,4-diene-3, 20-dione), cortisone (17α,21-dihydroxy-4-pregnene-3,11,20-trione), dexamethasone ((11β, 16α)-9-fluoro-11,17,21-trihydroxy-16-methylpregna-1,4-diene-3,20-dione), and hydrocortisone (11β,17α,21-trihydroxypregn-4-ene-3, 20-dione). These compounds, which are glucocorticoid receptor agonists, will generally be administered in the form of a dosage unit at a therapeutically effective amount of such compound. For example, prednisone or an equivalent drug may be administered from about 5 to about 80 mg, depending on the condition; hydrocortisone may be administered from about 100 to about 400 mg, depending on the condition; and dexamethasone may be administered from about 4 to about 16 mg, depending on the condition. These doses are typically administered once to twice daily, and for maintenance purposes, sometimes on alternate days.
For the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, any cholinomimetic drug, such as donepizil, may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. For the treatment of Parkinson's disease, any anti-Parkinson's drug, such as L-dopa, bromocriptine, or selegiline, may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. For the treatment of anxiety, any antianxiolytic drug, such as benzodiazepine, valium, or librium, may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. For the treatment of depression, any tricyclic antidepressant such as, desipramine, or any selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI's), such as sertraline hydrochloride and fluoxetine hydrochloride, may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. For the treatment of psychosis, any typical or atypical antipsychotic drug, such as haloperidol or clozapine may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. Any aldose reductase inhibitor may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. The term aldose reductase inhibitor refers to a compound which inhibits the bioconversion of glucose to sorbitol catalyzed by the enzyme aldose reductase. Such inhibition is readily determined by those skilled in the art according to standard assays (J. Malone, Diabetes, 29:861-864, 1980, "Red Cell Sorbitol, an Indicator of Diabetic Control"). A variety of aldose reductase inhibitors are described and referenced below; however other aldose reductase inhibitors will be known to those skilled in the art. Examples of aldose reductase inhibitors useful in the compositions and methods of this invention include, for example, zopolrestat, and other such compounds as disclosed and described in PCT/IB99/00206, filed 5 February 1999  and assigned to the assignee hereof.
Any glycogen phosphorylase inhibitor may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. The term glycogen phosphorylase inhibitor refers to any substance or agent or any combination of substances and/or agents which reduces, retards or eliminates the enzymatic action of glycogen phosphorylase. The currently known enzymatic action of glycogen phosphorylase is the degradation of glycogen by catalysis of the reversible reaction of a glycogen macromolecule and inorganic phosphate to glucose-1-phosphate and a glycogen macromolecule which is one glucosyl residue shorter than the original glycogen macromolecule (forward direction of glycogenolysis). Such actions are readily determined by those skilled in the art according to standard assays (e.g., as described in PCT/IB99/00206, filed 5 February 1999). A variety of these compounds are described in the following published international patent applications: WO 96/39384, published 12 December 1996, and WO 96/39385, published 12 December 1996; and in the following filed international patent application: PCT/IB99/00206, filed 5 February 1999.
Any sorbitol dehydrogenase inhibitor may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. The term sorbitol dehydrogenase inhibitor refers to a compound which inhibits the enzyme sorbitol dehydrogenase, which catalyzes the oxidation of sorbitol to fructose. Such inhibition is readily determined by those skilled in the art according to standard assays (as described in U.S. Patent No. 5,728,704 and references cited therein). A variety of these compounds are described and referenced below; however other sorbitol dehydrogenase inhibitors will be known to those skilled in the art. U.S. Pat. No. 5,728,704  discloses substituted pyrimidines which inhibit sorbitol dehydrogenase, lower fructose levels, and/or treat or prevent diabetic complications, such as diabetic neuropathy, diabetic retinopathy, diabetic nephropathy, diabetic microangiopathy and diabetic macroangiopathy.
Any known, commercially marketed antidiabetic compound may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. A variety of such compounds are described and referenced below; however other such compounds will be known to those skilled in the art. Examples of such compounds useful in the compositions and methods of this invention include, for example, insulin, metformin, troglitazone (REZULIN®) and sulfonylureas, such as glipizide (GLUCOTROL®), glyburide (GLYNASE®, MICRONASE®) and chlorpropamide (DIABINASE®).
Any β-adrenergic agonist may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. β -Adrenergic agents have been categorized into β1, β2, and β3 subtypes. Agonists of β-receptors promote the activation of adenyl cyclase. Activation of β1 receptors invokes increases in heart rate. Activation of β2 receptors induces relaxation of smooth muscle tissue which produces a drop in blood pressure and the onset of skeletal muscle tremors. Activation of β3 receptors is known to stimulate lipolysis, which is the breakdown of adipose tissue triglycerides to glycerol and fatty acids. Activation of β3 receptors also stimulates the metabolic rate, thereby increasing energy expenditure. Accordingly, activation of β3 receptors promotes the loss of fat mass. Compounds that stimulate β receptors are therefore useful as anti-obesity agents. Compounds which are β3-receptors agonists have hypoglycemic and/or anti-diabetic activity. Such activity is readily determined by those skilled in the art according to standard assays (International Patent Application, Publication No. WO 96/35671). Several compounds are described and referenced below; however, other β-adrenergic agonists will be known to those skilled in the art. International Patent Application, Publication No. WO 96/35671  discloses compounds, such as substituted aminopyridines, which are β-adrenergic agonists. International Patent Application, Publication No. 93/16189  discloses the use of selective β3 receptor agonists in combination with compounds which modify eating behavior for the treatment of obestiy.
Any thyromimetic antiobesity agent may be used as the second compound in the combination aspect of this disclosure. These compounds are tissue selective thyroid hormone agonists. These compounds are able to induce weight loss by mechanisms other than appetite suppression, e.g., through stimulation of the metabolic rate in peripheral tissue, which, in turn, produces weight loss. Such metabolic effect is readily measured by those skilled in the art according to standard assays. A variety of these compounds are described and referenced below; however other thyromimetic antiobesity agents will be known to those skilled in the art. It is well known to one of ordinary skill in the art that selectivity of thermogenic effect is an important requirement for a useful therapeutic agent in the treatment of, for example, obesity and related conditions.
Any eating behavior modifying compound may be used as the second compound of this disclosure. Compounds which modify eating behavior include anorectic agents, which are compounds which diminish the appetite. Such classes of anorectic agents are well known to one of ordinary skill in the art. A variety of these compounds are described in and referenced below; however, other anorectic agents will be known to those skilled in the art. Also, the following are antiobesity agents: phenylpropanolamine, ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phentermine, a Neuropeptide Y (hereinafter also referred to as "NPY") antagonist, a cholecystokinin-A (hereinafter referred to as CCK-A) agonist, a monoamine reuptake inhibitor (such as sibutramine), a sympathomimetic agent, a serotoninergic agent (such as dexfenfluramine or fenfluramine), a dopamine agonist (such as bromocriptine), a melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor agonist or mimetic, a melanocyte-stimulating hormone analog, a cannabinoid receptor antagonist, a melanin concentrating hormone antagonist, the OB protein (hereinafter referred to as "leptin"), a leptin analog, a galanin antagonist or a Gl lipase inhibitor or decreaser (such as orlistat). Other antiobesity agents include phosphatase 1B inhibitors, bombesin agonists, dehydroepiandrosterone or analogs thereof, glucocorticoid receptor modulators, orexin receptor antagonists, urocortin binding protein antagonists or glucagon-like peptide-1 (insulinotropin) agonists. A particularly preferred monoamine reuptake inhibitor is sibutramine, which can be prepared as disclosed in U.S. Patent No, 4,929,629. Preferred serotoninergic agents include fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine, which can be prepared as disclosed in U.S. Patent No. 3,198,834. A particularly preferred dopamine agonist is bromocriptine, which can be prepared as disclosed in U.S. Patent Nos. 3,752,814  and 3,752,888. Another preferred anorectic agent is phentermine, which can be prepared as disclosed in U.S. Patent No. 2,408,345.
Any NPY receptor antagonist may be used as the second component in the combination aspect of this disclosure. The term NPY receptor antagonist refers to compounds which interact with NPY receptors and inhibit the activity of neuropeptide Y at those receptors and thus are useful in treating disorders associated with neuropeptide Y, such as feeding disorders, including obesity. Such inhibition is readily determined by those skilled in the art according to standard assays (such as those described in International Patent Application, Publication No. WO 99/07703). In addition, the compounds described and referenced below are NPY receptor antagonists; however, other NPY receptor antagonists will also be known to those skilled in the art. International Patent Application, Publication No. WO 99/07703  discloses certain 4-aminopyrrole (3,2-d) pyrimidines as neuropeptide Y receptor antagonists. International patent application, Publication No. WO 96/14307, published 17 May 1996; International patent application, Publication No. WO 96/40660, published 19 December 1996; International patent application, Publication No. WO 98/03492; International patent application, Publication No. WO 98/03494; International patent application, Publication No. WO 98/03493; International patent application, Publication No. WO 96/14307, published 17 May 1996; International patent application, Publication No. WO 96/40660, published 19 December 1996; disclose additional compounds, such as substituted benzylamine derivatives, which are useful as neuropeptide Y specific ligands.
In combination therapy treatment, both the compounds of this invention and the other drug therapies are administered to mammals (e.g., humans, male or female) by conventional methods. As recognized by those skilled in the art, the therapeutically effective amounts of the compounds of this invention and the other drug therapies to be administered to a patient in combination therapy treatment will depend upon a number of factors, including, without limitation, the biological activity desired, the condition of the patient, and tolerance for the drug.
For example, the second compound, when administered to a mammal, is dosed at a range between about 0.01 to about 50 mg/kg/day body weight, preferably about 0.1 mg/kg/day to about 10 mg/kg/day body weight, administered singly or as a divided dose. Particularly, when the second compound is (1) sibutramine, the dosage of sibutramine is about 0.01 mg/kg/day to about 30 mg/kg/day body weight, preferably about 0.1 mg/kg/day to about 1 mg/kg/day body weight; (2) dexfenfluramine, the dosage of dexfenfluramine is about 0.01 mg/kg/day to about 30 mg/kg/day body weight, preferably about 0.1 mg/kg/day to about 1 mg/kg/day body weight; (3) bromocriptine, the dosage of bromocriptine is about 0.01 to about 10 mg/kg/day body weight, preferably 0.1 mg/kg/day to about 10 mg/kg/day body weight; (4) phentermine, the dosage of phentermine is about 0.01 mg/kg/day to about 10 mg/kg/day, preferably about 0.1 mg/kg/day to about 1 mg/kg/day body weight. Also, for example, as noted above, an amount of an aldose reductase inhibitor that is effective for the activities of this invention may be used as the second compound. Typically, an effective dosage for aldose reductase inhibitors is in the range of about 0.1 mg/kg/day to about 100 mg/kg/day in single or divided doses, preferably about 0.1 mg/kg/day to about 20 mg/kg/day in single or divided doses.
As noted above, the compounds and pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the present invention can be combined in a mixture with a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier, vehicle or diluent to provide pharmaceutical compositions useful for treating the biological conditions or disorders noted herein in mammalian, and more preferably, in human, patients. The particular carrier, vehicle or diluent employed in these pharmaceutical compositions may take a wide variety of forms depending upon the type of administration desired, for example, intravenous, oral, topical, suppository or parenteral. Also, compounds and salts thereof of this invention can be administered individually or together in any conventional dosage form, such as an oral, parenteral, rectal or transdermal dosage form.
For oral administration a pharmaceutical composition can take the form of solutions, suspensions, tablets, pills, capsules, powders, and the like. Tablets containing various excipients such as sodium citrate, calcium carbonate and calcium phosphate are employed along with various disintegrants such as starch and preferably potato or tapioca starch and certain complex silicates, together with binding agents such as polyvinylpyrrolidone, sucrose, gelatin and acacia. Additionally, lubricating agents such as magnesium stearate, sodium lauryl sulfate and talc are often very useful for tabletting purposes. Solid compositions of a similar type are also employed as fillers in soft and hard-filled gelatin capsules; preferred materials in this connection also include lactose or milk sugar as well as high molecular weight polyethylene glycols. When aqueous suspensions and/or elixirs are desired for oral administration, the compounds and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof of this invention can be combined with various sweetening agents, flavoring agents, coloring agents, emulsifying agents and/or suspending agents, as well as such diluents as water, ethanol, propylene glycol, glycerin and various like combinations thereof.
Due to their ease of administration, tablets and capsules represent the most advantageous oral dosage form for the pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention.
For purposes of parenteral administration, solutions in sesame or peanut oil or in aqueous propylene glycol can be employed, as well as sterile aqueous solutions of the corresponding water-soluble salts. Such aqueous solutions may be suitably buffered, if necessary, and the liquid diluent first rendered isotonic with sufficient saline or glucose. These aqueous solutions are especially suitable for intravenous, intramuscular, subcutaneous and intraperitoneal injection purposes. In this connection, the sterile aqueous media employed are all readily obtainable by standard techniques well-known to those skilled in the art.
For purposes of transdermal (e.g.,topical) administration, dilute sterile, aqueous or partially aqueous solutions (usually in about 0.1 % to 5% concentration), otherwise similar to the above parenteral solutions, are prepared.
For topical administration, the compounds of the present invention may be formulated using bland, moisturizing bases, such as ointments or creams. Examples of suitable ointment bases are petrolatum, petrolatum plus volatile silicones, lanolin, and water in oil emulsions.
Methods of preparing various pharmaceutical compositions with a certain amount of active ingredient are known, or will be apparent in light of this disclosure, to those skilled in this art. For examples of methods of preparing pharmaceutical compositions, see Remington's Pharmaceutical Sciences, Mack Publishing Company, Easter, Pa., 15th Edition (1975).
The pharmaceutical compositions and compounds and pharmaceutically acceptable salts thereof of the present invention will generally be administered in the form of a dosage unit (e.g., tablet, capsule, etc.) at a therapeutically effective amount of such compound or salt thereof from about 0.1 µg/kg of body weight to about 500 mg/kg of body weight, more particularly from about 1 µg/kg to about 250 mg/kg, and most particularly from about 2 µg/kg to about 100 mg/kg. More preferably, a compound of the present invention will be administered at an amount of about 0.1 mg/kg to about 500 mg/kg of body weight, and most preferably from about 0.1 mg/kg to about 50 mg/kg of body weight. As recognized by those skilled in the art, the particular quantity of pharmaceutical composition according to the present invention administered to a patient will depend upon a number of factors, including, without limitation, the biological activity desired, the condition of the patient, and tolerance for the drug.
Since the present disclosure has an aspect that relates to the treatment of the disease/conditions described herein with a combination of active ingredients which may be administered separately, the disclosure also relates to combining separate pharmaceutical compositions in kit form. The kit comprises two separate pharmaceutical compositions: a compound of formula II, an isomer thereof, a prodrug thereof or a salt of such compound, isomer or prodrug and a second compound as described above. The kit comprises a container, such as a divided bottle or a divided foil packet. Typically the kit comprises directions for the administration of the separate components. The kit form is particularly advantageous when the separate components are preferably administered in different dosage forms (e.g., oral and parenteral), are administered at different dosage intervals, or when titration of the individual components of the combination is desired by the prescribing physician.
An example of such a kit is a so-called blister pack. Blister packs are well known in the packaging industry and are being widely used for the packaging of pharmaceutical unit dosage forms (tablets, capsules, and the like). Blister packs generally consist of a sheet of relatively stiff material covered with a foil of a preferably transparent plastic material. During the packaging process, recesses are formed in the plastic foil. The recesses have the size and shape of the tablets or capsules to be packed. Next, the tablets or capsules are placed in the recesses and the sheet of relatively stiff material is sealed against the plastic foil at the face of the foil which is opposite from the direction in which the recesses were formed. As a result, the tablets or capsules are sealed in the recesses between the plastic foil and the sheet. Preferably, the strength of the sheet is such that the tablets or capsules can be removed from the blister pack by manually applying pressure on the recesses whereby an opening is formed in the sheet at the place of the recess. The tablet or capsule can then be removed via said opening.
It may be desirable to provide a memory aid on the kit, e.g., in the form of numbers next to the tablets or capsules whereby the numbers correspond with the days of the regimen which the tablets or capsules so specified should be ingested. Another example of such a memory aid is a calendar printed on the card, e.g., as follows "First Week, Monday, Tuesday, ...etc.... Second Week, Monday, Tuesday,..." etc. Other variations of memory aids will be readily apparent. A "daily dose" can be a single tablet or capsule or several pills or capsules to be taken on a given day. Also, a daily dose of formula II compound (or an isomer, prodrug or pharmaceutically acceptable salt thereof) can consist of one tablet or capsule while a daily dose of the second compound can consist of several tablets or capsules and vice versa. The memory aid should reflect this.
A dispenser designed to dispense the daily doses one at a time in the order of their intended use may be used.Preferably, the dispenser is equipped with a memory-aid, so as to further facilitate compliance with the regimen. An example of such a memory-aid is a mechanical counter which indicates the number of daily doses that has been dispensed. Another example of such a memory-aid is a battery-powered micro-chip memory coupled with a liquid crystal readout, or audible reminder signal which, for example, reads out the date that the last daily dose has been taken and/or reminds one when the next dose is to be taken.
The following paragraphs describe exemplary formulations, dosages etc. useful for non-human animals. The administration of compounds of this invention can be effected orally or non-orally, for example by injection. An amount of a compound of formula II or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt thereof, is administered such that a therapeutically effective dose is received, generally a daily dose which, when administered orally to an animal is usually between 0.01 and 500 mg/kg of body weight, preferably between 0.1 and 50 mg/kg of body weight. Conveniently, the medication can be carried in the drinking water so that a therapeutic dosage of the agent is ingested with the daily water supply. The agent can be directly metered into drinking water, preferably in the form of a liquid, water-soluble concentrate (such as an aqueous solution of a water soluble salt).Conveniently, the active ingredient can also be added directly to the feed, as such, or in the form of an animal feed supplement, also referred to as a premix or concentrate. A premix or concentrate of therapeutic agent in a carrier is more commonly employed for the inclusion of the agent in the feed. Suitable carriers are liquid or solid, as desired, such as water, various meals such as alfalfa meal, soybean meal, cottonseed oil meal, linseed oil meal, corncob meal and corn meal, molasses, urea, bone meal, and mineral mixes such as are commonly employed in poultry feeds. A particularly effective carrier is the respective animal feed itself; that is, a small portion of such feed. The carrier facilitates uniform distribution of the active materials in the finished feed with which the premix is blended. It is important that the compound be thoroughly blended into the premix and, subsequently, the feed. In this respect, the agent may be dispersed or dissolved in a suitable oily vehicle such as soybean oil, corn oil, cottonseed oil, and the like, or in a volatile organic solvent and then blended with the carrier. It will be appreciated that the proportions of active material in the concentrate are capable of wide variation since the amount of agent in the finished feed may be adjusted by blending the appropriate proportion of premix with the feed to obtain a desired level of therapeutic agent.
High potency concentrates may be blended by the feed manufacturer with proteinaceous carrier such as soybean oil meal and other meals, as described above, to produce concentrated supplements which are suitable for direct feeding to animals. In such instances, the animals are permitted to consume the usual diet. Alternatively, such concentrated supplements may be added directly to the feed to produce a nutritionally balanced, finished feed containing a therapeutically effective level of a compound according to the invention. The mixtures are thoroughly blended by standard procedures, such as in a twin shell blender, to ensure homogeneity.
If the supplement is used as a top dressing for the feed, it likewise helps to ensure uniformity of distribution of the active material across the top of the dressed feed.
The present invention has several advantagous veterinary features. For the pet owner or veterinarian who wishes to increase leanness and trim unwanted fat from pet animals, the present disclosure provides the means by which this can be accomplished. For poultry and swine raisers, using the method of the present disclosure yields leaner animals which command higher prices from the meat industry.
Drinking water and feed effective for increasing lean meat deposition and for improving lean meat to fat ratio are generally prepared by mixing a compound of the invention with a sufficient amount of animal feed to provide from about 10-3 to 500 ppm of the compound in the feed or water.
The preferred medicated swine, cattle, sheep and goat feed generally contain from 1 to 400 grams of active ingredient per ton of feed, the optimum amount for these animals usually being about 50 to 300 grams per ton of feed.
The preferred feed of domestic pets, such as cats and dogs, usually contain about 1 to 400 grams and preferably 10 to 400 grams of active ingredient per ton of feed.
For parenteral administration in animals, the compounds of the present invention may be prepared in the form of a paste or a pellet and administered as an implant, usually under the skin of the head or ear of the animal in which increase in lean meat deposition and improvement in lean mean to fat ratio is sought.
In general, parenteral administration involves injection of a sufficient amount of a compound of the present invention to provide the animal with 0.01 to 500 mg/kg/day of body weight of the active ingredient. The preferred dosage for poultry, swine, cattle, sheep, goats and domestic pets is in the range of from 0.1 to 50 mg/kg/day of body weight of active ingredient.
Paste formulations can be prepared by dispersing the active compound in a pharmaceutically acceptable oil such as peanut oil, sesame oil, corn oil or the like.
Pellets containing an effective amount of a compound of the present invention can be prepared by admixing a compound of the present invention with a diluent such as carbowax, carnuba wax, and the like, and a lubricant, such as magnesium or calcium stearate, can be added to improve the pelleting process.
It is, of course, recognized that more than one pellet may be administered to an animal to achieve the desired dose level which will provide the increase in lean meat deposition and improvement in lean meat to fat ratio desired. Moreover, it has been found that implants may also be made periodically during the animal treatment period in order to maintain the proper drug level in the animal's body.
The activity of the compounds of the present invention are demonstrated by one or more of the assays described below:The following is a description of an assay for the identification of glucocorticoid receptor antagonists/agonists: HeLa cells containing endogenous human glucocorticoid receptors are transfected with a 3xGRE-luciferase plasmid generated by standard procedures and a plasmid conferring neomycin resistance. Novel glucocorticoid responsive cell lines are generated and characterized. One such cell line designated HeLa-GRE9 is used for determining the activity of compounds at the glucocorticoid receptor. Cells are maintained in charcoal-stripped serum and transferred to 96-well microtiter plates one day prior to treatment with various concentrations (10-12 to 10-5) of test compounds in the absence and presence of known glucocorticoid receptor agonists (i.e., dexamethasone, hydrocortisone) for up to 24 hours. Treatments are performed in triplicate. Cell lysates are prepared and luciferase activity is determined using a luminometer. Agonist activity is assessed by comparing the luciferase activity from cells treated with test compound to cells treated with the agonist dexamethasone. Antagonist activity is assessed by comparing the luciferase activity of an EC50 concentration of dexamethasone in the absence and presence of test compound. The EC50 (concentration that produced 50% of the maximal response) for dexamethasone is calculated from dose response curves.
The following is a description of an assay for determining the competitive inhibition binding of the Human Type II Glucocorticoid receptor expressed in Sf9 cells:Binding protocol: Compounds are tested in a binding displacement assay using human glucocorticoid receptor expressed in Sf9 cells with 3H-dexamethasone as the ligand. Human glucorticoid receptor is expressed in Sf9 cells as described in Mol. Endocrinology 4: 209, 1990. Pellets containing Sf9 cells expressing the human GR receptor from 1L vats are lysed with 40 ul of 20mM AEBSF stock (Calbiochem, LaJolla, CA) containing 50 mg/ml leupeptin and 40 ml of homogenization buffer is added. The assay is carried out in 96-well polypropylene plates in a final volume of 130 ul containing 200 ug Sf9 lysate protein, 6.9 nM 3H-dexamethasone (Amersham, Arlington Heights, IL) in presence of test compounds, test compound vehicle (for total counts) or excess dexamethasone (7 uM non-radioactive, to determine non-specific binding) in an appropriate volume of assay buffer. All compounds are tested at 6 concentrations in duplicate (concentration range 0.1-30 nM or 3-1000 nM). Test compounds are diluted from a 25 mM stock in 100% DMSO with 70%EtOH and added in a volume of 2 µl. Once all additions are made the plates are shaken, sealed with sealing tape and incubated at 4 °C overnight.
After the overnight incubation, unbound counts are removed with dextran coated charcoal as follows: 75 µl of dextran coated charcoal (5.0 g activated charcoal, 0.5 g dextran adjusted to volume of 100 ml with assay buffer) is added, plates are shaken and incubated for five minutes at 4 °C. Plates are then centrifuged in a refrigerated benchtop centrifuge at top speed for 15 minutes. 100 µl of the supernatant from each well is placed into a 96-well PET plate with 200 µl of scintillation cocktail and counted on a beta counter (1450 MicroBetaTrilux, from Wallac, Turku, Finland).
Data analysis: After subtracting non-specific binding, counts bound are expressed as % of total counts. The concentration response for test compounds are fitted to a sigmoidal curve to determine the IC50 (concentration of compound that displaces 50% of the bound counts).
Reagents: Assay Buffer: 2.0 ml 1M Tris, 0.2 ml 0.5mM EDTA, 77.1 mg DTT, 0.243 g sodium molybdate in a volume of 100 ml water; Homogenization buffer: 2.0 ml 0.5 M K2HPO4 (pH 7.6), 20 µl 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0), 77.1 mg DTT, 0.486 g sodium molybdate in a volume of 100 ml water.
The following is a description of an assay for determining receptor selectivity: T47D cells from ATCC containing endogenous human progesterone and mineralocorticoid receptors are transiently transfected with a 3xGRE-luciferase using Lipofectamine Plus (GIBCO-DRL, Gaithersburg, MD). Twenty-four hours post-transfection cells are maintained in charcoal-stripped serum and transferred to 96-well microtiter plates. The next day cells are treated with various concentrations (10-12 to 10-5) of test compounds in the absence and presence of a known progesterone receptor agonist (progesterone) and a known mineralocorticoid receptor agonist (aldosterone) for up to 24 hours. Treatments are performed in triplicate. Cell lysates are prepared and luciferase activity is determined using a luminometer. Agonist activity is assessed by comparing the luciferase activity from cells treated with compound alone to cells treated with either the agonist progesterone or aldosterone. Antagonist activity is assessed by comparing the luciferase activity of an EC50 concentration of progesterone or aldosterone in the absence and presence of compound. The EC50 (concentration that produced 50% of maximal response) for progesterone and aldosterone is calculated from dose response curves.
The following is a description of an assay for determining anti-diabetes and anti-obesity activity: The obese, diabetic ob/ob mouse is used to assess the anti-diabetes and anti-obesity activity of the compounds. Six to 10 week old ob/ob male mice (Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, Maine) are dosed with test compound for 2 to 10 days. Plasma glucose levels are determined by measuring glucose from samples obtained by orbital bleeding. Glucose is quantitated using an Abbott Autoanalyzer (Abbott, Inc., Abbott Park, IL). Food intake is monitored on a daily basis by differential weighing.
The following is a description of an assay for determining the ability of a compound to inhibit glucocorticoid agonist induction of liver tyrosine amino transferase (TAT) activity in conscious rats:Animals: Male Sprague Dawley rats (from Charles River, Wilimington MA) (adrenal-intact or adrenalectomized at least one week prior to the screen) b.w. 90g are used. The rats are housed under standard conditions for 7-10d prior to use in the screen.
Experimental protocol: Rats (usually 3 per treatment group) are dosed with test compound, vehicle or positive control (Ru486) either i.p., p.o., s.c. or i.v. (tail vein). The dosing vehicle for the test compounds is typically one of the following: 100% PEG 400, 0.25% methyl cellulose in water, 70% ethanol or 0.1 N HCl and the compounds are tested at doses ranging from 10 to 125 mg/kg. The compounds are dosed in a volume of 1.0 ml/ 100 g body weight (for p.o.) or 0.1 ml/100g body weight for other routes of administration . Ten minutes after the administration of the test compound, the rats are injected with dexamethasone (0.03 mg/kg i.p. in a volume of 0.1 ml/ 100g) or vehicle. To prepare the dexamethasone dosing solution, dexamethasone (from Sigma, St. Louis, MO) is dissolved in 100% ethanol and diluted with water (final: 10% ethanol:90% water, vol:vol). Groups treated with vehicle-vehicle, vehicle-dexamethasone, and Ru486-dexamethasone are included in each screen. The compounds are tested vs. dexamethasone only. Three hours after the injection of dexamethasone the rats are sacrificed by decapitation. A sample of liver (0.3 g) is excised and placed in 2.7 ml of ice cold buffer and homogenized with a polytron. To obtain cytosol the liver homogenate is centrifuged at 105,000g for 60 min and the supernatant is stored at -80 °C until analysis. TAT is assayed on 100 ul of a 1:20 dilution of the 105,000g supernatant using the method of Granner and Tomkins (Methods in Enzymology 17A: 633-637,1970) and a reaction time of 8-10 minutes. TAT activity is expressed as umol product/min/g liver.
Interpretation: Treatment data are analyzed by using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with protected least significant difference (PLSD) post-hoc analysis. Compounds are considered active in this test if the TAT activity in the group pretreated with compound prior to dexamethasone administration is significantly (P < 0.05) decreased relative to the TAT activity in the vehicle-dexamethasone treated group.
The following is a description of an assay for determining the effect of a compound on two typical genes that are upregulated during an inflammatory response. This assay, the glucocorticoid inhibition of IL-1 (Interleukin-1) induced MMP-1 (Matrix Metalloproteinase-1) and IL-8 (Interleukin-8) production in human chondrosarcoma cells, is conducted as follows: SW1353 human chondrosarcoma cells (obtained from ATCC) from passage 12 through passage 19 are used in a 96 well format assay. Cells are plated at confluence into 96 well plates in DMEM (Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium) with 10% fetal bovine serum and incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2. After 24 hours, serum containing media is removed and replaced with 200 ul/well DMEM containing 1 mg/L insulin, 2 g/L lactalbumin hydrosylate, and 0.5 mg/L ascorbic acid and returned to incubation at 37 °C, 5% CO2. The following morning, the serum free media is removed and replaced with 150 ul/well fresh serum free media containing +/- 20 ng/ml IL-1 beta, +/- 5 nM dexamethasone, +/compound. All conditions are completed in triplicate using only the inner 60 wells of the 96 well plate. Outside surrounding wells of plate contain 200 ul of serum free DMEM. Plates are incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2. At 24 hours after addition of IL-1, 25 ul of sample from each well is removed under aseptic conditions for IL-8 production analysis. Samples are stored at -20 °C until time of analysis. IL-8 production is assessed using the Quantikine human IL-8 ELISA kit from R&D Systems (D8050) on samples diluted 60-fold in RD5P Calibrator Diluent, following the manufacturer's protocol. The percent of the average IL-1 control is determined for the average of each of the triplicate samples following subtraction of the average signal from untreated cells. IC50's are determined from log linear plots of the percent of control versus the concentration of inhibitor. At 72 hours after IL-1 addition, the remaining media is removed and stored at -20 °C until time of MMP-1 production analysis. MMP-1 production is assessed via the Bio-Trak MMP-1 ELISA kit from Amersham (RPN2610) on 100 ul of neat sample following the manufacturer's protocol.
The percent of the average IL-1 control is determined for the average of each of the triplicate samples following subtraction of the average signal from untreated cells. IC50's are determined from log linear plots of the percent of control versus the concentration of inhibitor. Dexamethasone has proven to be a good positive control inhibitor of both IL-8 and MMP1 expression (IC50=5nM).
The following compounds of the present invention are preferred:2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(4-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(2-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(3-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-pyrazinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;2-phenanthrenecarbonitrile, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-(2-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)-, (4bS,7S,8aR);2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-7-methyl-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-, (4bS,7R,8aR)-;2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-7-methyl-4b-(phenylmethyl)-N-3-pyridinyl-, (4bS,7R,8aR)-;and2-phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a, 9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(trifluoromethyl)-, (4bS, 7R, 8aR)-.
EXAMPLES
Preparation 1 1-Benzyl-6-methoxy-3,4-dihydro-1H-naphthalen-2-one
A solution of 51 g (0.289 mol) of 6-methoxy-2-tetralone of formula A-1 wherein D is C, R10 is methoxy; R14, R15 and R16 are each H, and 24.2 mL (0.289 mol) of pyrrolidine in 1.5 L of toluene was heated to reflux, over a Dean-Stark trap, overnight. After removal of the azeotroped water, the reaction mixture was cooled to RT, concentrated to an oil, and dissolved in 725 mL of dioxane. To this solution was added 52 mL (0.434 mol) of benzyl bromide and the resulting solution was heated to reflux overnight. Water (100 mL) was added to the solution the resultant mixture was heated to reflux for an additional 2 h. The mixture was cooled to room temperature and poured into a solution of 1 N HCl and extracted 3 times with EtOAc. The organic layers were washed with H2O and saturated NaHCO3, then dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and evaporated to dryness. The crude product was purified by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 10% EtOAc to 15% EtOAc in hexanes as the gradient eluant to give 65.2 g of the title product of this preparation as a yellow oil (85%). IR (neat) 2937, 1712, 1500 cm-1; 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 2.41-2.59 (m, 3H), 2.76 (dt, 1H, J = 5.4, 15.5), 3.15-3.70 (m, 2H), 3.67 (t, 1H, J = 6.3), 3.77 (s, 3H), 6.67-6.70 (m, 2H), 6.81 (d, 1H, J = 8.1), 6.87-6.89 (m, 2H), 7.13-7.17 (m, 3H); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 27.44, 38.19, 39.19, 54.13, 55.14, 112.11, 112.96, 126.30, 128.07, 128.26, 129.35, 129.53, 138.05, 138.20, 158.30, 212.41; MS m/z 267 (M+H)+.
Preparation 2 1(R)-Benzyl-6-methoxy-1(S)-(3-oxo-butyl)-3,4-dihydro-1H-naphthelen-2-one
A solution of 62 g (0.23 mol) of the title product of Preparation 1 and 28 mL, (0.23 mol) of freshly distilled (S)-(-)-alpha-methyl benzylamine in 100 mL of toluene was heated to reflux, over a Dean-Stark trap, overnight. After removal of the azeotroped water, the imine solution was cooled to 0 °C and 21 mL (0.26 mol) of freshly distilled methylvinylketone was added dropwise to the solution. The solution was stirred at 0 °C for 30 min then heated to 40 °C overnight. The reaction solution was cooled to 0° C and 17 mL of acetic acid and 14 mL of H2O were added and the resultant solution was allow to warm to RT for 2 h. The solution was poured into H2O and extracted three times with EtOAc. The combined organic layers were washed with 1 N HCl, H2O, saturated NaHCO3, then dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and evaporated to dryness. The crude product was purified by chromatography over SiO2 using 15% EtOAc to 35% EtOAc in hexanes as the gradient eluant to give 48 g of the title product of this preparation as a yellow solid. 1HNMR (400 MHz, CDCL3) δ 1.38 (s, 3H), 1.40-1.51 (m, 2H), 1.64 (ddd, 1H, J = 2.1, 4.5, 13), 1.97 (broad s, 1H), 2.20 (dt, 1H, J = 4.5, 13), 2.59 (d, 1H, J = 6.6), 3.08 (d, 1H, J = 18), 3.16 (d, 1H, J = 16), 3.33 (dd, 1H, J = 6.6, 18), 3.62 (d, 1H, J = 16), 3.72 (s, 3H), 6.57 (d, 1H, J = 2.5), 6.67 (dd, 1H, J = 2.5, 8.8), 7.00-7.23 (m, 6H); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 27.90, 32.79, 34.40, 38.43, 41.49, 53.51, 55.12, 58.47, 79.06, 112.05, 113.09, 125.37, 127.63, 127.69, 130.27, 132.21, 135.45, 138.65, 157.88, 213.49; MS m/z 337 (M+H)+, 319 (M-OH)+.
Preparation 3 1(S)-Benzyl-6-methoxy-1(R)-(3-oxo-butyl)-3,4-dihydro-1H-naphthelen-2-one
The title product of this preparation was prepared using a method analogous to Preparation 2, using (R)-(+)-alphamethyl benzylamine in the initial imine formation. Starting with 4.64 g 1-benzyl-6-methoxy-3,4-dihydro-1H-naphthalen-2-one produced 3.58 g of the title product of this preparation as a yellow solid. 1HNMR (400 MHz, CDCL3) δ 1.38 (s, 3H), 1.40-1.51 (m, 2H), 1.64 (ddd, 1H, J = 2.1, 4.5, 13), 1.97 (broad s, 1H), 2.20 (dt, 1H, J = 4.5, 13), 2.59 (d, 1H, J = 6.6), 3.08 (d, 1H, J = 18), 3.16 (d, 1H, J = 16), 3.33 (dd, 1H, J = 6.6, 18), 3.62 (d, 1H, J = 16), 3.72 (s, 3H), 6.57 (d, 1H, J = 2.5), 6.67 (dd, 1H, J = 2.5, 8.8), 7.00-7.23 (m, 6H); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 27.90, 32.79, 34.40, 38.43, 41.49, 53.51, 55.12, 58.47, 79.06, 112.05, 113.09, 125.37, 127.63, 127.69, 130.27, 132.21, 135.45, 138.65, 157.88, 213.49; MS m/z 337 (M+H)+, 319 (M-OH)+.
Preparations 4 to 19 omitted
Preparation 20 Pyridine, 3-[[[(2R,4'aS,10'aR)-3',4',4'a,9',10',10'a-hexahydro-4'a-(phenylmethyl)spiro[oxirane-2,2'(1'H)-phenanthren]-7'-yl]oxy]methyl]-
The title compound of this preparation was prepared by procedures analogous to those described below in Example 76. MS: 413 (M+1)+.
Example 1 (for reference)
2(3H)-Phenanthrenone, 4,4a,9,10-tetrahydro-7-methoxy-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, (S)-
A solution of 48 g (143 mmol) of the title product of Preparation 2 and 71 mL of 1 M sodium methoxide in 100 mL of methanol was stirred at room temperature for 15 min, then heated to 75 °C for 3 h. The solution was cooled to 0 °C, 8.2 mL of acetic acid was added dropwise, and the solution was concentrated to an oil. The oil was dissolved in EtOAc, washed with saturated NaHCO3 and brine, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and evaporated to dryness. The crude product was purified by chromatography over SiO2 using 15% EtOAc to 35% EtOAc in hexanes as the gradient eluant to give 44 g 2(3H)-phenanthrenone, 4,4a,9,10-tetrahydro-7-methoxy-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, (S)- as an off-white powder (60% from 1-benzyl-6-methoxy-3,4-dihydro-1H-naphthalen-2-one). Recrystallization from EtOAc/hexane afforded 35 g of the title product of this example as a white crystalline solid. mp 101-102 °C; IR (neat) 1667, 1500 cm-1; 1HNMR (CDCL3) 1.83-1.90 (m, 1H), 2.02 (dt, 1H, J = 5.5, 14), 2.27 (dt, 1H, J = 4.3, 14) 2.44-2.51 (m, 2H), 2.64-2.79 (m, 3H), 3.14 (d, 1H, J = 13), 3.21 (d, 1H, J = 13), 3.78 (s 3H), 5.96 (s, 1H), 6.54 (d, 1H, J = 2.6), 6.71 (d, 2H, J = 7.1), 6.77 (dd, 1H, J = 2.6, 8.7), 7.06-7.23 (m, 4H)); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 30.71, 32.10, 34.62, 36.09, 43.62, 46.36, 55.20, 112.78, 112.84, 125.53, 126.68, 127.96, 128.12, 130.08, 133.01, 137.24, 137.28, 157.75, 169.16, 198.81; MS m/z 319 (M+H)+. Anal. Calcd. for C22H22O2: C, 82.99; H, 6.96; N, 0. Found: C, 83.21; H, 7.08; N, <0.10.
Example 2 omitted
Example 3 (for reference)
2(3H)-Phenanthrenone, 4,4a,9,10-tetrahydro-7-hydroxy-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, (S)-
To a stirring solution of 40 g (0.126 mol) of the title product of Example 1 (which was made by procedures described in Example 1) and 46.5 g (0.126 mol) of tetrabutylammonium iodide in 630 mL of dichloromethane at -78 °C under N2 atmosphere was added 300 mL of 1 M boron trichloride in methylene chloride. The resultant solution was allowed to warm to RT for 1.5 h, then poured into excess ice and stirred rapidly, overnight. The mixture was extracted with dichloromethane, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 20%EtOAc to 60%EtOAc in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded 33.3 g of the title product of this example as an off-white powder (87%). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 1.81-2.00 (m, 2H), 2.26 (dt, 1H, J = 4.2, 13), 2.40 (dd, 1H, J = 4.5, 18), 2.53 (ddd, 1H, J = 1.7, 5.6, 14), 2.58-2.80 (m, 3H), 3.20 (d, 1H, J=13), 3.26 (d, 1H, J = 13), 5.92 (s, 1H), 6.45 (d, 1H, J = 2.5), 6.67 (dd, 1H, J = 2.5, 8.5), 6.76 (d, 2H, J = 6.6), 7.05-7.14 (m, 4H); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CD3OD) δ 30.22, 32.03, 34.08, 36.04, 43.73, 45.97, 113.76, 113.91, 124.50, 126.25, 127.49, 127.94, 129.84, 131.86, 137.0, 137.71, 155.34, 171.73, 200.33; MS m/z 305 (M+H)+.
Examples 4 and 5 omitted
Example 6 (for reference)
2(1H)-Phenanthrenone, 3,4,4a,9,10,10a-hexahydro-7-hydroxy-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, (4aS-trans)-
Ammonia (1.5 L) was condensed into a round bottom flask at -78 °C equipped with a dry ice reflux condenser at -78 °C and a mechanical stirrer. To this flask was added 0.7 g (99 mmol) of lithium wire and the solution turned dark blue. A solution of 10 g (32.8 mmol) of the title product of Example 3 in 400 mL of 1:1 dioxane:ether was added to the mixture slowly in order to keep the reaction a dark blue. As the blue color dissipated, a small amount of lithium wire was added to the mixture to regenerate the blue color. The total amount of lithium added to the reaction mixture did not exceed 3.5 g (495 mmol). After the complete addition of 10 g of the title product of Example 3, the reaction was stirred an additional 30 min, then 14 g of solid ammonium chloride was added and immediate dissipation of the blue color was observed. H2O was added to the mixture and it was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. The crude product was purified by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 15% EtOAc to 20% EtOAc in hexanes as the gradient eluant to afford 8.16 g of the title product of this example as a white solid (81%). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 1.52 (dt, 1H, J = 4.5, 13), 1.64-1.71 (m, 1H), 1.90-2.15 (m, 2H), 2.27 (ddd, 1H, J = 2.5, 3.7, 15), 2.39 (dm, 1H, J = 15), 2.48 (ddd, 1H, J = 2.0, 6.5, 13), 2.72 (t, 1H, J = 14), 2.84 (d, 1H, J = 13), 2.89-3.01 (m, 3H), 3.22 (d, 1H, J = 13), 6.17 (d, 1H, J = 8.5), 6.24 (dd, 1H, J = 2.5, 8.5), 6.53 (d, 1H, J = 2.5), 6.65-6.68 (m, 1H), 7.04-7.13, (m, 3H); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CD3OD) δ; 27.9, 33.7, 34.8, 36.0, 37.6, 39.4, 43.6, 44.0, 111.3, 114.6, 125.7, 127.0, 127.9, 130.5, 133.4, 136.8, 138.0, 155.1, 212.7; MS m/z 307 (M+H)+.
Example 7 (for reference)
2(1H)-Phenanthrenone, 3,4,4a,9,10,10a-hexahydro-7-hydroxy-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, (4aS-cis)-
To a solution of 1 g (3.6 mmol) of the title product of Example 3 in 75 mL ofethanol and 0.27 mL of 2M KOH was added 0.15 g of10% Pd/C. The reaction mixture was shaken under 45 p.s.i. (which is about 3 atm) ofH2 gas for4 h. Acetic acid (0.035 mL) was added then the mixture was filtered through Celite®, washing the Celite® with ethanol, and then the ethanol was removed under reduced pressure. The resultant residue was partitioned between EtOAc and sat. NaHCO3, extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. The crude product was purified by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 25% EtOAc in hexanes as the eluant to afford947 mg of the title product of this example as a white solid (86%). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 1.52-1.60 (m, 1H), 1.87 (ddd, 1H, J = 4.8, 11, 14), 2.00-2.35 (m, 6H), 2.39 (dt, 1H, J = 5.2, 14), 2.69-2.92 (m, 2H), 2.96 (d, 1H, J = 13), 3.00 (d, 1H, J = 13), 6.56-6.58 (m, 2H), 6.88-6.92 (m, 3H), 7.13-7.15, (m, 3H); 13C NMR (100 MHz, CD3OD) δ 23.7, 25.3, 34.7, 37.2, 39.6, 40.3, 42.8, 47.7, 113.1, 115.1, 127.3, 128.0, 130.5, 137.2, 137.8, 155.2, 213.9; MS m/z 307 (M+H)+.
<table>
Example 8 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(chloroethynyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]- and 2,7-Phenanthrenediol,2-(chloroethynyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2S-(2α,4aβ,10aα)]-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 95 mg of cis-dichloroethylene (0.98 mM) in 5 mL of THF at 0 °C was added 2.5 mL of 0.5 M lithium diisopropylamide in THF and the resultant mixture was allowed to warm to RT for 30 min under nitrogen atomosphere. A solution of 30 mg (0.098 mmol) of the title product of Example 6 in 0.65 mL of THF was added dropwise, and the reaction mixture was stirred an additional 2 h. Saturated, aqueous ammonium chloride was added, and the mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Initial purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 20% EtOAc in hexanes as the eluant afforded 30 mg of a light brown solid. Further purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 2% acetone in dichloromethane to 4% acetone in dichloromethane as a gradient eluant afforded 20 mg (56%) of the first listed title product of this example (higher Rf) and 7.0 mg (19%) of the second listed title product of this example (lower Rf) as white solids. The physical characteristics of the first listed title product of this example are as follows: mp 230-232 °C (decomp.); 1H NMR (300 MHz, CD3OD) δ 1.40 (mt, 1H, J = 14), 1.64-1.70.(m, 1H), 1.80-2.13 (m, 7H), 2.59 (d, 1H, J = 13), 2.93-2.97 (m, 3H), 6.13 (d, 1H, J = 8.5), 6.25 (dd, 1H, J = 2.6, 8.5), 6.54-6.57 (m, 3H), 7.00-7.07 (m, 3H); 13C NMR (75 MHz, CD3OD) δ 25.5, 28.7, 31.8, 37.2, 40.52, 41.71, 43.43, 63.1, 70.7, 74.1, 112.4, 116.1, 126.8, 128.3, 138.9, 132.1, 136.2, 138.3,139.5, 156.3; MS m/z 366 (M+H)+, 349 (M-OH)+.
The physical characteristics of the second listed title product of this example are as follows: mp 216-219 °C (decomp.) 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 1.47 (mt, 1H, J =14), 1.56-1.62 (m, 1H), 1.80-2.00 (m, 5H), 2.08 (mt, 1H, J = 13), 2.23 (dt, 1H, J = 3.8, 14), 2.59 (d, 1H, J = 13), 2.82-2.93 (m) and 2.95 (d, 1H, J = 13), 6.08 (d, 1H, J = 8.6), 6.20 (dd, 1H, J = 2.2, 8.6), 6.50 (d, 1H, J = 2.2), 6.54-6.56 (m, 2H), 7.03-7.06 (m, 3H); 13C NMR (75 MHz, CD3OD) δ 25.4,28.8, 28.9, 36.0, 36.7, 40.4, 42.5, 65.1, 67.3, 75.9, 112.3, 116.1, 126.8, 128.2, 128.8, 132.2, 136.3, 138.3, 139.7, 156.2; MS m/z 366 (M+H)+, 349 (M-OH)+.
<table>
Example 9 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(1-propynyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]- and 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(1-propynyl)-, [2S-(2α,4aβ,10aα))-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 183 mL of THF saturated with propyne gas at 0 °C was added 143 mL of 1 M lithium diisopropylamide in THF and the resultant mixture was stirred under nitrogen atomosphere for 20 min. A solution of 7.3 g (23.8 mmol) of the title product of Example 6 in 250 mL of THF was added dropwise, and the reaction mixture was warmed to RT and stirred overnight. Saturated, aqueous ammonium chloride was added, and the mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 2% acetone in dichloromethane to 4% acetone as the eluant afforded 4.0 g (49 %) of the first listed title product of this example (higher Rf) and 2.4 g (29 %) of the second listed title product of this example as white solids.
Physical characteristics of the first listed title product of this example are as follows: mp 227-229 °C (decomp.), 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 1.42 (mt, 1H, J = 14), 1.61.(ddd, 1H, J = 3.4, 4.1, 8.8), 1.72 (s, 3H), 1.73-1.82 (m, 2H), 1.84-2.10 (m, 5H), 2.55 (d, 1H, J = 13), 2.83-2.93 (m) and 2.94 (d, 3H, J = 13), 6.10 (d, 1H, J = 8.3), 6.23 (dd, 1H, J = 2.5, 8.4), 6.52-6.55 (m, 3H), 7.00-7.05 (m, 3H); 13C NMR (62 MHz, CD3OD) δ 2.5, 24.1, 27.3, 30.5, 35.8, 36.1, 39.1, 40.2, 42.4, 68.9, 79.5, 82.3, 110.9, 114.7, 125.4, 126.8, 127.5, 130.7, 135.1, 136.9, 138.3, 154.8; MS mlz 346 (M+H)+, 329 (M-OH)+.
Physical characteristics of the second listed title product of this example are as follows: mp 222-223 °C (decomp.); 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 1.46 (mt, 1H, J = 14), 1.54-1.60.(m, 1H), 1.83 (s) overlap with 1.75-1.94 (m, 8H), 2.08 (mt, 1H, J = 13), 2.20 (dt, 1H, J = 4, 14), 2.57 (d, 1H, J = 13), 2.88 (t, 2H, J = 8.7), 2.94 (d, 1H, J = 13), 6.08 (d, 1H, J = 8.3), 6.20 (dd, 1H, J = 2.4, 8.3), 6.50 (d, 1H, J = 2.4), 6.53-6.56 (m, 2H), 7.01-7.06 (m, 3H); 13C NMR (62 MHz, CD3OD) δ 1.7, 24.1, 27.4, 27.6, 35.0, 35.2, 36.4, 39.0, 41.6, 65.5, 76.9, 84.5, 110.8, 114.6, 125.3, 126.8, 127.4, 130.7, 135.0, 136.9, 138.4, 154.7; MS m/z 346 (M+H)+, 329 (M-OH)+.
<table>
Example 10 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-propyl-[2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
A mixture of 975 mg of the first listed title product of Example 9, 195 mg of 10 % Pd/C, and 100 mg K2CO3 in MeOH was shaken under 40 p.s.i. (which is about 2.6 atm) of H2 gas for 16 h. The mixture was filtered through Celite® and concentrated to afford 945 mg of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 368 (M+18)+.
Examples 11 and 12 omitted
Example 13 (for reference)
Methanesulfonic acid, trifluoro, 4b, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a, 9, 10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-2-phenanthrenyl ester, [4bS-(4bα, 7α, 8aβ)]-
To a stirring solution of 4.14 g of the first listed title compound of Example 9 (which was prepared by procedures described in Example 9), 1.95 mL of 2,6-lutidine, and 292 mg of 4-dimethylaminopyridine in 150 mL of dichloromethane at -40 °C under nitrogen was added 2.6 mL of trifluoromethylsulfonic anhydride. The resultant mixture was stirred for 0.5 h at -40 °C, 0.5 h at 0 °C, then 1.5 h at RT. The reaction mixture was poured into 1 N HCL and extracted with dichloromethane. The organic layer was washed with water, sat. NaHCO3, and brine, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 15% EtOAc in hexanes to 20% EtOAc in hexane as the gradient eluant afforded 4.4 g (77%) of the title product of this example as a white solid. 1H NMR (400 MHz, C6D6) δ 6.07 (d, 1H, J = 8.4), 6.63 (d, 1H, J = 2.5).
Example 14 (for reference)
2-Phenanthrenecarboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
A mixture of 1.18 g of the title product of Example 13, 0.27 g of1,3-bis(diphenylphosphino)-propanol, 2.54 mL oftriethylamine, and 0.1 g of palladium acetate in 40 mL of 1:1 DMF /MeOH was shaken under 60 p.s.i. (which is about 4 atm)carbon monoxide at70 °C for4 h. The reaction mixture was concentrated to remove MeOH. The mixture was poured into 1:1 hexane / EtOAc, washed with 50 % brine, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 23 % EtOAc in hexanes to 28 % EtOAc in hexane as the gradient eluant afforded0.79 g (82 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 371 (M-17)+.
<table>
Example 15 & 2-Phenanthrenecarbonitrile, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
A stirring mixture of 1.0 g of the title product of Example 13, 0.4 g of tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium(0), and 0.17 g of zinc(II)cyanide in 9.5 mL of 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) under nitrogen was heated to 90 °C for 4 h. The reaction mixture was poured into sat. NaHCO3, filtered through Celite®, and extracted with EtOAc. The organic layer was dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 20% EtOAc in hexanes to 30 % EtOAc in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded 0.64 g (86 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 338 (M-17)+.
Example 16 (for reference)
2-Phenanthrenol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(-propynyl)-7-(2-pyridinyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
Nitrogen gas was bubbled through a solution 300 mg of the title product of Example 13, 70 mg of 1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphino)ferrocene, and 28 mg of palladium acetate in THF for 5 min. Under nitrogen atmosphere, the solution was cooled to -78 °C and 3.78 mL of 0.5 M bromo-2-pyridyl zinc in THF was added. The solution was warmed to RT then heated to 70 °C overnight. After cooling to RT, sat. NH4Cl was added and the resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 20% EtOAc in hexanes as the eluant afforded 173 mg (67 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 408 (M+1)+.
Example 17 omitted
Example 18 (for reference)
2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[3-(1H-imidazol-1-yl)propyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-,[4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
To a stirring solution of 1-(3-aminopropyl)imidazole in 1 mL of dichloromethane at 0 °C under N2 was added 0.1 mL of 2.0 M trimethylaluminum in hexane. The mixture was stirred at 0 °C for 20 min. then at RT for 1 h. To this mixture was added 20 mg of the title compound of Example 14 in 1 mL of dichloromethane. The mixture was heated to reflux for 6 h then removed from the heat and stirred at RT for 3 days. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 5% MeOH in dichloromethane to 10% MeOH in dichloromethane as the gradient eluant afforded 22 mg (88 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 483 (M+1)+.
Examples 19 to 75 omitted
Example 76 (for reference)
2-Phenanthrenol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(1-propynyl)-7-(3-pyridinylmethoxy)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
To a solution of 30 mg of the first listed title product of Example 8 (which was prepared by procedures described in Example 8) and 8 mg of 60% NaH in 2 mL of anhydrous DMF was added 18 mg of 3-picolyl chloride hydrochloride at RT under N2 atmosphere overnight. The reaction was quenched with NH4Cl (sat.), extracted with EtOAc (X3), washed with brine, dried over Na2SO4, filtered and concentrated to dryness. Purification by preparative TLC SiO2 using 4% MeOH in CH2Cl2 as the elutant afforded 32 mg (80%) of the title product of this example as white fluffy powder. MS m/z 438 (M+H)+.
Examples 77 and 78 omitted
Example 79 (for reference)
Spiro[oxirane-2,2'(1'H)-phenanthren]-7'-ol, 3',4',4'a,9', 10', 10'a-hexahydro-4'a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2'R-(2'α,4'aα,10'aβ)]-
To a solution of 91 mg of trimethyl sulfonium iodide in 1 mL of anhydrous DMF was added 55 mg of t-BuOK at 0 °C under N2 atmosphere and the mixture was stirred for 5 min. To the resultant solution was added 20 mg of the title product of Example 6 in 1 mL of DMF slowly and stirred for another 1 h at 0 °C. The reaction was quenched with NH4Cl (sat), extracted with EtOAc (X3), washed with brine, dried over Na2SO4, filtered and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography SiO2 using 100% CH2Cl2 to 2% acetone in CH2Cl2 as the gradient elutant afforded 13 mg (70%) of the title product of this example as white fluffy powder. MS mlz 303 (M-17)+.
Example 80 omitted
<table>
Example 81 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(methoxymethyl)-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
A solution of 20 mg of the title product of Example 79 (which was prepared by procedures described in Example 79) and 0.071 mL of 25% (w/w) sodium methoxide in 5 mL of anhydrous MeOH was heated to reflux for 3 h. The reaction was cooled and quenched with NH4Cl(sat.), extracted with EtOAc (X3), washed with brine, dried over Na2SO4, filtered and concentrated to dryness. Purification by preparative TLC SiO2 using 30% EtOAc in hexanes as the elutant afforded 15 mg (69%) of the title product of this example as white fluffy powder. MS m/z 335 (M-17)+.
Examples 82 to 135 omitted
Example 136 (for reference)
2-Phenanthrenol, 2,3,4,4a,9,10-hexahydro-7-methoxy-2-phenyl-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, (2R-cis)-
To a flame dried flask, 5 ml of THF and 1.3 ml of phenylmagnesium chloride were added. The title product of Example 3 (200 mg) in 5 ml THF was added dropwise to the solution (sat.) at 0 °C. The reaction was stirred at 0 °C for an hour and quenched with NH4Cl extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4 and filtered. The mixture was purified with flash chromatography (25% EtOAc in hexane) on silica gel to afford the title product of this example as light yellow solid, 245 mg, yield 98%, MS: 379(M-17)+.
Examples 137 to 150 omitted
<table>
Example 151 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-butyl-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, (4aS,10aR)-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 136. MS: 382 (M+18)+.
Examples 152 to 154 omitted
<table>
Example 155 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(chloroethynyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2S-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 8. MS: 349 (M-17)+.
<table>
Example 156 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(3,3,3-trifluoro-1-propynyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
A 5-L three-necked, round-bottom flask was equipped with a dry ice condenser and a dropping funnel. The flask was charged with 1000 mL anhydrous THF, and 3,3,3-trifluoropropyne gas was bubbled through for 10 mins. About 100 g (∼15 eqs) of the gas was condensed during this period. Solution was then cooled to - 78 °C and 200 mL of n-BuLi (2.5 M solution in hexanes, ∼8 eqs) was added slowly via the dropping funnel. The resultant mixture was stirred under -78 °C for 1 hour. Then 300 mL of anhydrous THF was added to the reaction flask. A solution of 20 g of the starting compound, 2(1H)-phenanthrenone, 4a-(benzyl)-3,4,4a,5,8,9,10,10a-octahydro-7-hydroxy-, [4aS-[4aα[E], 10aβ]]- in 200 mL of THF was added dropwise, followed by the addition of another 500 mL anhydrous THF, and the reaction mixture was stirred at -78 °C for another hour. Saturated, aqueous ammonium chloride solution was added and the mixture was extracted with EtOAc three times, dried and concentrated. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 2% Ethyl Acetate in Methylene Chloride to 5% Ethyl Acetate in Methylene Chloride as the eluant afforded 20.8 g of the title product of this example as a yellow-white solid. MS : 399 (M-1)+.
Example 157 omitted
<table>
Example 158 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(chloroethynyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2S-(2α,4aα,10aα)]-, MS: 349 (M-17)+.
Example 159 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(chloroethynyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aβ,10aβ)]-, MS: 349 (M-17)+.
Example 160 omitted & 
Example 161 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(chloroethynyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aβ,10aα)]-
</table>
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous t those described above inExample 8. MS: 349 (M-17)+.
<table>
Example 162 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(1-propynyl)-, [2S-(2α,4aβ,10aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 9. MS: 349 (M-17)+.
Examples 163-164
Thetitle compounds of Examples 163-164 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 8.
<table>
Example 163 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(chloroethynyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aα)]-, MS: 349 (M-17)+.
</table>
<table>
Example 164 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(chloroethynyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2S-(2α,4aβ,10aβ)]-, MS: 349 (M-17)+.
</table>
Examples 165 to 188 omitted
Example 189
Thetitle compound of Example 189 was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 7.
<table>
Example 189 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2,4a-dipropyl-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-, MS: 285 (M-17)+.
</table>
Examples 190 and 191 omitted
The title compounds of Examples 192-193 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 136.
<table>
Example 192 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2,4a-dipropyl-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aα)]-, MS: 285 (M-17)+.
Example 193 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2,4a-dipropyl-, [2S-(2α,4aβ,10aβ)]-, MS: 285 (M-17)+.
</table>
Examples 194 to 230 omitted
Example 231
Thetitle compound ofExample 231 was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 18.
<table>
Example 231 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 487 (M+1)+.
</table>
<table>
Example 232 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]- HCl salt
</table>
The title compound of this example is the HCl salt of the title compound of Example 231. MS: 487 (M+1)+.
Examples 233 to 237 omitted
<table>
Example 238 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-propyl-2-(1-propynyl)-,[2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 9. MS: 281 (M-17)+.
Examples 239 and 240 omitted
<table>
Example 241 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(4-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 779 mg of4-aminomethylpyridine in 10 mL ofdichloromethane at0 °C under N2 was added 3.6 mL of 2.0 Mtrimethylaluminum intoluene. The mixture was stirred at 0 °C for 20 min. then atRT for 1 h. To this mixture was added 350 mg of thetitle compound of Example 14 in 5 mL ofdichloromethane. The mixture was heated toreflux overnight. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 5% MeOH in dichloromethane to 10% MeOH in dichloromethane as the gradient eluant afforded362 mg (87 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 465 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 242 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(4-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, HCl salt
</table>
The title compound of this example is the HCl salt of the title compound of Example 241. MS: 465 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 243 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-[2-(4-pyridinyl)ethyl]-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 241. MS: 479 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 244 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(2-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 6.2 g of 2-aminomethylpyridine in 80 mL of dichloromethane at 0 °C under N2 was added 26 mL of 2.0 M trimethylaluminum in toluene. The mixture was stirred at 0 °C for 20 min. then at RT for 1 h. To this mixture was added 2.2 g of the title compound of Example 14 (which was made by procedures described in Example 14) in 50 mL of dichloromethane. The mixture was heated to reflux overnight. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 5% MeOH in dichloromethane to 10% MeOH in dichloromethane as the gradient eluant afforded 1.4 g (53 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 465 (M+1)+.
Examples 245 and 246
The compounds of Examples 245 and 246 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 244.
<table>
Example 245 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(2-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt
</table>
The title product of this example is the HCl salt of the title product ofExample 244. MS: 465 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 246 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-[2-(2-pyridinyl)ethyl]-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 479 (M+1)+.
</table>
Example 247 omitted
<table>
Example 248 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,8,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(3-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 0.21 mL of3-aminomethylpyridine in 1 mL ofdichloromethane at0 °C under N2 was added 0.1 mL of 2.0 Mtrimethylaluminum inhexane. The mixture was stirred at 0 °C for 20 min. then atRT for 1 h. To this mixture was added 20 mg of thetitle compound of Example 14 in 1 mL ofdichloromethane. The mixture was heated toreflux overnight. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 5% MeOH in dichloromethane to 10% MeOH in dichloromethane as the gradient eluant afforded18 mg (75 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 465 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 249 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(3-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl-salt
</table>
The title product of this example is the HCl salt of the title product of Example 248. MS: 465 (M+1)+
Examples 250 and 251 omitted
Examples 252-253
Thetitle compounds of Examples 252-253 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 9.
<table>
Example 252 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-pentyl-2-(1-propynyl)-,[2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-, MS: 309 (M-17)+.
Example 253 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 4a-butyl-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(1-propynyl)-,[2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-, MS: 295 (M-17)+.
</table>
Examples 254 to 257 omitted
<table>
Example 258 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 4a-(3-butenyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(1-propynyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 9. MS: 293 (M-17)+.
Examples 259 to 265 omitted
Examples 266-267
Thetitle compounds of Examples 266-267 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 248.
<table>
Example 266 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-2-pyridinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 451 (M+1)+.
Example 267 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-2-pyridinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt, MS: 451 (M+1)+.
Example 268 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-pyrazinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 244. MS: 452 (M+1)+.
Examples 269-270
The title products of Examples 269-270 are the HCl salt and the p-methanesulfonic acid salt, respectively, of the title product of Example 268.
<table>
Example 269 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-pyrazinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt, MS: 452 (M+1)+.
Example 270 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-pyrazinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-p-methanesulfonic acid salt, MS: 452 (M+1)+.
</table>
<table>
Example 271 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-3-pyridinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 248. MS: 450 (M).
<table>
Example 272 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-3-pyridinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt
</table>
The title product of this example is the HCl salt of the title product of Example 271. MS: 451 (M+1)+.
Examples 273-274
Thetitle compounds of Examples 273-274 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 248.
<table>
Example 273 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-4-pyrimidinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 452 (M+1)+.
Example 274 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-propyl-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(4-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bR-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 417 (M+1)+.
Example 275 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-propyl-7-(1-propynyl)-N-(4-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bR-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]- HCl salt
</table>
The title compound of this example is the HCl salt of the title compound of Example 274. MS: 417 (M+1)+.
Examples 276 and 277 omitted
<table>
Example 278 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-2-pyrimidinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 248. MS: 452 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 279 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-2-pyrimidinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt
</table>
The title product of this example is the HCl salt of the title product of Example 278. MS: 452 (M+1)+.
Examples 280 to 282 omitted
Example 283
Thetitle compound ofExample 283 was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 248.
<table>
Example 283 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-methoxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-pyrazinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 466 (M+1)+.
Example 284 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-methoxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-N-pyrazinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt
</table>
The title product of this example is the HCl salt of the title product of Example 283. MS: 466 (M+1)+.
Examples 285 to 295 omitted
The title compound of Example 296 was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 16.
<table>
Example 296 & 2-Phenanthrenecarbonitrile, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-propyl-7-(1-propynyl)-, (4bR-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 290 (M-17)+.
</table>
Examples 297 to 308 omitted
Example 309
Thetitle compound ofExample 309 was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 15.
<table>
Example 309 & 2-Phenanthrenecarbonitrile, 4b-butyl-4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bR-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 322 (M+1)+.
</table>
Examples 310 to 312 omitted
<table>
Example 313 & 2-Phenanthrenecarbonitrile, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 0.88 (t, 3H, J = 7.3), 6.43 (d, 1H, J = 8.3)
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 15.
Examples 314 and 315 omitted
<table>
Example 316 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-(6-methyl-2-pyridinyl)-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 244. MS: 469 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 317 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-(6-methyl-2-pyridinyl)-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt
</table>
The title product of this example is the HCl salt of the title product of Example 316. MS: 534 (M+1)+.
Examples 318 to 323 omitted
<table>
Example 324 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(6-methyl-2-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described below inExample 332. MS: 483 (M-17)+.
<table>
Example 325 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(6-methyl-2-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]- HCl salt
</table>
The title compound of this example is the HCl salt of the title compound of Example 324. MS: 483 (M-17)+.
Examples 326 to 328 omitted
Examples 329-331
Thetitle compounds of Examples 329-331 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described below inExample 332.
<table>
Example 329 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-(6-methyl-2-pyridinyl)-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 465 (M+1)+.
Example 330 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(6-methyl-2-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 479 (M+1)+.
Example 331 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(6-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 479 (M+1)+.
Example 332 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 250 mg of 2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine in 5 mL of dichloromethane at 0 °C under N2 was added 1.02 mL of 2.0 M trimethylaluminum in toluene. The mixture was stirred at 0 °C for 20 min. then at RT for 1 h. To this mixture was added 100 mg of the title compound of Example 14 in 5 mL of dichloromethane. The mixture was heated to reflux overnight. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 90% EtOAc in hexanes as the eluant afforded 99 mg (80 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 479 (M+1)+.
Examples 333 to 336 omitted
<table>
Example 337 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 332. MS: 479 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 338 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 232 mg of2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine in 10 mL ofdichloromethane at0 °C under N2 was added 0.95 mL of 2.0 Mtrimethylaluminum intoluene. The mixture was stirred at 0 °C for 20 min. then atRT for 1 h. To this mixture was added 300 mg of 2-phenanthrenecarboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(1-propyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]- in 10 mL ofdichloromethane. The mixture was heated toreflux overnight. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 10 % isopropanol and 1 % acetone in hexanes to 30 % isopropanol and 5 % acetone in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded303 mg (80 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 2.56 (s, 2H), MS: 483 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 339 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt
</table>
The title product of this example is the HCl salt of the title product of Example 338. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 2.56 (s, 2H), MS: 483 (M+1)+.
Example 340 omitted
Examples 341 and 342
Thetitle compounds of Examples 341-342 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 338.
<table>
Example 341 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-4-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 483 (M+1)+.
Example 342 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-(2-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 469 (M+1)+.
Example 343 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-(2-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-HCl salt
</table>
The title product of this example is the HCl salt of the title product of Example 342. MS: 469 (M+1)+.
Examples 344-345
Thetitle compounds of Examples 344-345 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 338.
<table>
Example 344 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-(4-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 469 (M+1)+.
Example 345 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-(3-pyridinylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 469 (M+1)+.
</table>
Examples 346 and 347 omitted
<table>
Example 348 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)-, [2S-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 10. MS: 487 (M-17)+.
Examples 349-350
Thetitle compounds of Examples 349-350 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 338.
<table>
Example 349 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-pyrazinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ}]-, MS: 456 (M+1)+.
Example 350 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-2-pyridinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) δ 7.22 (d, 1H, J = 1).
</table>
Examples 351-353
Thetitle compounds of Examples 351-353 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 10.
<table>
Example 351 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(2-methylpropyl)-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aβ,10aα)]-, MS: 347 (M-17)+.
Example 352 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(2-methylpropyl)-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-, MS: 347 (M-17)+.
Example 353 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(3-methylbutyl)-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-, MS: 361 (M-17)+.
</table>
Examples 354 to 360 omitted
Examples 361 and 363
Thetitle compounds of Examples 361 and 363 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 332.
<table>
Example 361 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-4-pyridinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 455 (M+1)+.
</table>
Example 362 omitted
<table>
Example 363 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-propyl-N-3-pyridinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 455 (M+1)+.
</table>
Examples 364 and 365 omitted
Examples 366 and 367
Thetitle compounds of Examples 366 and 367 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 10.
<table>
Example 366 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(4-methylpentyl)-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-, MS: 391 (M-1)+.
Example 367 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(4-methylpentyl)-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2S-(2α,4aβ,10aα)]-, MS: 391 (M-1)+.
</table>
Examples 368 to 381 omitted
<table>
Example 382 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(3,3-dimethylbutyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 10. MS: 391 (M-1)+.
Examples 383 to 569 omitted
<table>
Example 570 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-pentyl-2-propyl-,[2R-(2α,4aα,10aα)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 10. Mass: 313 (M-17)+.
Examples 571 to 603 omitted
<table>
Example 604 & 2-Phenanthrenecarbonitrile, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-pentyl-7-(1-propynyl)-, [4bR-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 15. Mass: 335 (M).
Examples 605 to 675 omitted
Examples 676 and 677
Thetitle compounds of Examples 676 and 677 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 81.
<table>
Example 676 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 2-(ethoxymethyl)-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-, Mass: 349 (M-17)+.
Example 677 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-[(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy)methyl]-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-, Mass: 403 (M-17)+.
</table>
Examples 678 to 724 omitted
Example 725 (for reference)
2-Phenanthrenol, 2-[(cyclobutyloxy)methyl]-1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-7-(3-pyridinylmethoxy)-, [2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
To a solution of 20 mg of the title compound of Preparation 20 and 6 mg of Na in 1 mL of anhydrous DMF was added 0.019 mL of cyclobutanol at 85 °C under N2 atmosphere overnight. The reaction was quenched with NH4Cl (sat.), extracted with EtOAc (X3), washed with brine, dried over Na2SO4, filtered and concentrated to dryness. Purification by preparative TLC SiO2 using 8% acetone in methylene chloride as the eluant afforded 18 mg (76%) of the title product of this example as white fluffy powder. Mass: 484 (M+1)+.
Examples 726 to 749 omitted
<table>
Example 750 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-methyl-4a-(phenylmethyl)-,[2R-(2α,4aα,10aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 9. MS: 323 (M+1)+.
Examples 751 to 764 omitted
<table>
Example 765 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 7-(ethoxymethyl)-4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-N-3-pyridinyl-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 244. MS: 472 (M+1)+.
Examples 766 and 767 omitted
<table>
Example 768 & 2-Phenanthrenecarbonitrile, 7-(ethoxymethyl)-4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 81. MS: 377 (M+1)+.
Example 769
Thetitle compound ofExample 769 was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 725.
<table>
Example 769 & 2-Phenanthrenecarbonitrile, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-[(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy)methyl]-[4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-, MS: 430 (M+1)+.
</table>
Example 770 omitted
<table>
Example 771 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 7-(2-pentyl)-4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 150 mg of 2-phenanthrenecarboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(pentyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]- in 7 mL of dichloromethane was added 2 mL of 0.5 M 2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine aluminum amide solution prepared as in Example 772. The mixture was heated to reflux for 3 h. An additional 1 mL of 0.5 M 2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine aluminum amide solution was added and the mixture was heated to reflux for an additional 2 h. The mixture was cooled to 0 °C. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 10% MeOH in dichloromethane as the eluant afforded 172 mg (94 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 511 (M+1)+.
Example 771A-1 (for reference)
2 (2-Phenanthrenecarboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(butyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-;
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 14. MS: 421 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 771A-2 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 7-butyl-4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-, (4bS,7R,8aR)-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 210 mg of the title compound of Example 771A-1 in 10 mL of dichloromethane was added 3 mL of 0.5 M 2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine aluminum amide solution prepared as in Example 772. The mixture was heated to reflux overnight. The mixture was cooled to 0 °C. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 40% acetone in hexanes to 50% acetone in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded 163 mg (63%) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 497 (M+1)+.
Example 771B omitted
Example 771C-1 (for reference)
Methanesulfonic acid, trifluoro, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)-2-phenanthrenylester, [4bS, 7S, 8aR]-
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above for the preparation of the title compound of Example 13. MS: 537 (M+1)+;1H NMR (400MHz, d6-acetone) δ 7.18 (d, 1H, J = 2.9) 6.83 (dd, 1H, J = 2.9, 8.7), 6.43 (d, 1H, J = 8.7).
Example 771C-2 (for reference)
2-Phenanthrenecarboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10- octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS, 7S, 8aR]-
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above for the preparation of thetitle compound ofExample 14. MS: 447 ((M+1)+;1H NMR (400 Mhz, CDOD3) δ 7.75 (d, 1H, J = 1.7), 7.40 (dd, 1H, J = 1.7, 8.2), 6.39 (d, 1H, J = 8.2).
<table>
Example 771C-3 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-((2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)-, (4bS,7S,8aR)-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 286 mg of thetitle compound of Example 771C-2 in 12 mL ofdichloromethane was added 4 mL of 0.5 M2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine aluminum amide solution prepared as in Example 772. The mixture was heated toreflux overnight. The mixture was cooled to0°C. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 40% acetone in hexanes to 50% acetone in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded272 mg (79%) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 537 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 771D & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(propoxymethyl)-N-3-pyridinyl-, (4bS,7R,8aR)-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 50 mg of 2-phenanthrenecarboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(propoxymethyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]- in 5 mL of dichloromethane was added 4 mL of 0.5 M 3-aminopyridine aluminum amide solution prepared as in Example 772. The mixture was heated to reflux overnight. The mixture was cooled to 0 °C. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by preparative TLC (SiO2) with 3 % MeOH in dichloromethane afforded 9 mg (16%) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 485 (M+1)+.
Example 771E-1 (for reference)
(2-Phenanthrenecarboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(methyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8β)]-)
Thetitle compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 14. 1HNMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ 7.81 (s,1H), 3.90 (s, 1H), 1.29 (s, 1H); MS: 365 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 771E-2 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-7-methyl-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-, (4bS,7R,8aR)-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 300 mg of thetitle compound of Example 771E-1 in 16 mL ofdichloromethane was added 8.2 mL of 0.5 M2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine aluminum amide solution prepared as in Example 772. The mixture was heated toreflux overnight. The mixture was cooled to0 °C. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 40% acetone in hexanes to 50% acetone in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded344 mg (92%) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 455 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 772 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 7-(ethoxymethyl)-4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 31 mL of of 2.0 M trimethylaluminum in toluene and 24 mL of dichloromethane was added 8.25 g of 2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine in 80 mL of dichloromethane at 0 °C under N2. The mixture was stirred at 0 °C for 20 min. then at RT for 1 h to give 2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine aluminum amide solution. A separate flask was charged with 1.68 g of 2-phenanthrenecarboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(ethoxymethyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS-(4bα,7α,8aβ)]- in 80 mL of dichloromethane. To this solution was added 32 mL of 2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine aluminum amide solution, prepared as described above. The mixture was heated to reflux overnight. The mixture was cooled to 0 °C. To the reaction mixture was added 1N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with dichloromethane, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 40% acetone in hexanes to 50% acetone in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded 1.9 g (96 %) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 499 (M+1)+.
Examples 773 to 780 omitted
<table>
Example 781 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-(methoxymethyl)-4a-(phenylmethyl)-, (2S,4aS,10aR)-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 81. MS: 353 (M+1)+.
Examples 782 and 783 omitted
<table>
Example 784 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(propoxymethyl)-, (4bS,7R,8aR)-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 244. MS: 514 (M+1)+.
Examples 785 and 786 omitted
Examples 787 to 792
Thetitle compounds of Examples 787 and 790 to792 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 244.
<table>
Example 787 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-[(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy)methyl]-,(4bS,7R,8aR)-; MS: 554 (M+1)+.
</table>
Examples 788 and 789 omitted
<table>
Example 790 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a;9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-7-[(1-methylethoxy)methyl]-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-,(4bS,7R,8aR)-; MS: 514 (M+1)+.
Example 791 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-7-methyl-4b-(phenylmethyl)-N-3-pyridinyl-, (4bS,7R,8aR)- MS: 428 (M+1)+.
Example 792 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-7-(3-methylbutyl)-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-,(4bS,7R,8aR)-; MS: 512 (M+1)+.
</table>
Examples 793 to 795 omitted
Examples 796-798
Thetitle compounds of Examples 796-798 were prepared by procedures analogous to those described above inExample 9.
<table>
Example 796 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-methyl-4a-(phenylmethyl)-,(2R,4aS,10aS)-; MS: 323 (M+1)+.
Example 797 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-methyl-4a-(phenylmethyl)-,(2S,4aS,10aS)-; MS: 323 (M+1)+.
Example 798 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-2-methyl-4a-propyl-,(2R,4aR,10aS)-; MS: 275 (M+1)+.
Example 799 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(trifluoromethyl)-, (2R,4aS,10aR)-;
</table>
To a solution of 455 mg of the title product of Example 6 in 20 mL of anhydrous THF and 15 mL of 1 Mtrifluoromethyl trimethylsilane was added 194 mg ofTBAF at0 °C under nitrogen atmosphere for 10 min. The mixture was then stirred atRT for 3 hr. Two equivalents of TBAF were added and stirred for 1 hr at RT. The mixture was concentrated and purification by flash chromatography SiO2 using 100% hexanes to 20% ethyl acetate in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded518 mg (93%) of the title product as white fluffy powder. MS m/z 375 (M-1)+.
<table>
Example 800 & 2,7-Phenanthrenediol, 1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a-octahydro-4a-(phenylmethyl)-2-(trifluoromethyl)-, (4aS,10aS)-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 799. MS: 377 (M+1)+.
Examples 801 and 802 omitted
Example 803A (for reference)
Methanesulfonic acid, trifluoro, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b (phenylmethyl)-7-(trifluoromethyl)-2-phenathrenyl ester [(4bα, 7α, 8aβ)]
A solution of 50 mg of the title compound of Example 799, 55 mg of K2CO3, 43 mg of 4-nitrophenyltriflate in 5 mL of anhydrous DMF was stirred under N2 at room temperature overnight. The reaction mixture was quenched with NaHCO3 (sat.), extracted with EtOAc, dried over MgSO4, filtered and concentrated to dryness. Purification by preparative TLC using 25% EtOAc in hexanes as the eluant yielded 45 mg (66%) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 509 (M+1)+
Example 803B (for reference)
2-Phenanthrene carboxylic acid, 4b,5,6,7,8,8a,9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-4b(phenylmethyl)-7-(trifluoromethyl)-, methyl ester, [4bS-(4bα, 7α, 8aβ)]
Starting with the title product of Example 803A and utilizing procedures analogous to those described inExample 14, the title product of this example was obtained. MS: 419 ((M+1).+
<table>
Example 803C & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a, 9, 10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-(phenylmethyl)-7-(trifluoromethyl)-, (4bS, 7R, 8aR)-
</table>
To a stirring solution of 300 mg of thetitle compound of Example 803B in 12 mL ofdichloromethane was added 4 mL of 0.5 M2-methyl-3-aminomethylpyridine aluminum amide solution prepared as in Example 772. The mixture was heated toreflux overnight. The mixture was cooled to0 °C. To the reaction mixture was added 1 N HCl dropwise until the aqueous layer was approximately pH 4. The resultant mixture was extracted with EtOAc, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated to dryness. Purification by flash chromatography over SiO2 using 40% acetone in hexanes to 50% acetone in hexanes as the gradient eluant afforded290 mg (80%) of the title product of this example as a white solid. MS: 509 (M+1)+.
<table>
Example 804 & 2-Phenanthrenecarboxamide, 4b, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a, 9,10-octahydro-7-hydroxy-7-methyl-N-[(2-methyl-3-pyridinyl)methyl]-4b-propyl-, (4bR, 7R, 8aS)-
</table>
The title compound of this example was prepared by procedures analogous to those described above in Example 244. MS: 408 (M+1)+.
The compounds of this invention either alone or in combination with each other or other compounds generally will be administered in a convenient formulation. The following formulation examples only are illustrative and are not intended to limit the scope of the present invention.
In the formulations which follow, "active ingredient" means a compound of this invention.
Formulation 1: Gelatin Capsules
Hard gelatin capsules are prepared using the following:
<table>
<header>
Ingredient & Quantity (mg/capsule)
</header>
Active ingredient & 0.25-100
Starch, NF & 0-650
Starch flowable powder & 0-50
Silicone fluid 350 centistokes & 0-15
</table>
A tablet formulation is prepared using the ingredients below:
<table>
<header>
Ingredient & Quantity (mg/tablet)
</header>
Active ingredient & 0.25-100
Cellulose, microcrystalline & 200-650
Silicon dioxide, fumed & 10-650
Stearic acid & 5-15
</table>
The components are blended and compressed to form tablets.
Alternatively, tablets each containing 0.25-100 mg of active ingredients are made up as follows:
<table>
<header>
Ingredient & Quantity (mg/tablet)
</header>
Active ingredient & 0.25-100
Starch & 45
Cellulose, microcrystalline & 35
Polyvinylpyrrolidone (as 10% solution in water) & 4
Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose & 4.5
Magnesium stearate & 0.5
Talc & 1
</table>
The active ingredient, starch, and cellulose are passed through a No. 45 mesh U.S. sieve and mixed thoroughly. The solution of polyvinylpyrrolidone is mixed with the resultant powders which are then passed through a No. 14 mesh U.S. sieve. The granules so produced are dried at 50° - 60°C and passed through a No. 18 mesh U.S. sieve. The sodium carboxymethyl starch, magnesium stearate, and talc, previously passed through a No. 60 U.S. sieve, are then added to the granules which, after mixing, are compressed on a tablet machine to yield tablets.
Suspensions each containing 0.25-100 mg of active ingredient per 5 ml dose are made as follows:
<table>
<header>
Ingredient & Quantity (mg/5 ml)
</header>
Active ingredient & 0.25-100 mg
Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose & 50 mg
Syrup & 1.25 mg
Benzoic acid solution & 0.10 mL
Flavor & q.v.
Color & q.v.
Purified Water to & 5 mL
</table>
The active ingredient is passed through a No. 45 mesh U.S. sieve and mixed with the sodium carboxymethyl cellulose and syrup to form smooth paste. The benzoic acid solution, flavor, and color are diluted with some of the water and added, with stirring. Sufficient water is then added to produce the required volume. An aerosol solution is prepared containing the following ingredients: Formulation 5: Aerosol
<table>
<header>
Ingredient & Quantity (% by weight)
</header>
Active ingredient & 0.25
Ethanol & 25.75
Propellant 22 (Chlorodifluoromethane) & 70.00
</table>
The active ingredient is mixed with ethanol and the mixture added to a portion of the propellant 22, cooled to 30°C, and transferred to a filling device. The required amount is then fed to a stainless steel container and diluted with the remaining propellant. The valve units are then fitted to the container.
Suppositories are prepared as follows:
<table>
<header>
Ingredient & Quantity (mg/suppository)
</header>
Active ingredient & 250
Saturated fatty acid glycerides & 2,000
</table>
The active ingredient is passed through a No. 60 mesh U.S. sieve and suspended in the saturated fatty acid glycerides previously melted using the minimum necessary heat. The mixture is then poured into a suppository mold of nominal 2 g capacity and allowed to cool.
An intravenous formulation is prepared as follows:
<table>
<header>
Ingredient & Quantity
</header>
Active ingredient & 20 mg
Isotonic saline & 1,000 mL
</table>
The solution of the above ingredients is intravenously administered to a patient at a rate of about 1 mL per minute.
The active ingredient in any of the formulations above may also be a combination of agents.