The International Application claims priority of Chinese Patent Application CN201510131828.5, filed on March 24, 2015, the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties.
Field of invention
The present invention relates to a condensed ring derivative, and preparation method, intermediate, pharmaceutical composition and use thereof.
Prior arts
Hyperuricemia (HUA) is related to many diseases such as gout, hypertension, diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, metabolic syndrome, coronary heart disease and renal damage etc. (Puig JG, et al. CurrOpin Rheumatol, 2008, 20, 187-191; Edwards NL, et al. Cleve Clin J Med, 2008, 75(Suppl 5), 13-16), which has been a metabolic disease threatening human's health, and was recognized as one of the twenty stubborn and chronic diseases in the 21st century by the United Nations.
Uric acid is the final product metabolized from the purine in vivo, which goes through glomerular filtration mainly in its origin form, and reabsorption, re-secretion by renal tubule, finally excreted with urine, and very few of them can enter enteric cavity through the secreting of the mesenteric cells. (Hediger M A, et al. Physiology 2005, 20(2), 125-133). S1 section of the proximal convoluted tubule is the position where the uric acid is reabsorbed, and 98%-100% filtered uric acid enters the epithelium through urate transporter 1 (URAT1) upon the brush border membrane of the tubular epithelial cells. Inhibiting the activity of the URAT1 can reduce the reabsorption of the uric acid, which allows the uric acid excreted with urine thereby lowering the level of the uric acid in the blood and relieving or treating hyperuricemia and various related diseases.
Content of the present invention
The technical problem to be solved in the present invention is to provide a condensed ring derivative totally different from the prior art, and preparation method, intermediate, pharmaceutical composition and use thereof. The condensed ring derivative of the present invention has obvious inhibitory activity against URAT1, which can effectively relieve or treat hyperuricemia and various related diseases.
The present invention provides a condensed ring derivative having a structure of formula I, a tautomer, a mesomer, a racemate, an enantiomer, a diastereoisomer, or a pharmaceutically acceptable salt, a metabolite, a metabolic precursor or a pro-drug thereof,Wherein ring A is an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl, more preferably a phenyl (e.g.or a heteroaryl (preferably a C2-5 heteroaryl having 1-3 heteroatoms selected from N or S, more preferably pyridinyl (e.g.imidazolyl (e.g.orpyrazolyl (e.g.triazolyl (e.g.or pyridazinyl (e.g.M is a hydrogen, a deuterium or a pharmaceutically acceptable cation (preferably a sodium ion, a potassium ion or a calcium ion);U is a chemical bond (preferably a single bond or a double bond),V and W are independently C or N, provided that V and W are not N simultaneously;X isN or S;Y is a chemical bond (preferably a single bond or a double bond),or N;Z isor S;R1 and R2 are independently H, D, a halogen (preferably F, Cl, Br or I, more preferably F), an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl), CN, an alkoxy (preferably a C1-4 alkoxy), a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl), an alkenyl (preferably a C2-4 alkenyl), a alkynyl (preferably a C2-4 alkynyl) or a heterocycloalkyl (preferably a C2-10 heterocycloalkyl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O, S or N; the C2-10 heterocycloalkyl is preferably a C2-5 heterocycloalkyl); or, R1, R2 together with the carbon atom attached form a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl, more preferably cyclobutyl) or a heterocyclic group (preferably a C2-5 heterocyclic group having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O or S); the alkyl, the alkoxy, the cycloalkyl, the alkenyl, the alkynyl, the heterocycloalkyl, the cycloalkyl formed by R1, R2 and the carbon atom attached, or the heteroalkyl formed by R1, R2 and the carbon atom attached can further be substituted by a substituent selected from the group consisting of D (e.g.), a halogen (e.g. F, Cl, Br or I, preferably CI), CN, an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl), an alkoxy (preferably a C1-4 alkoxy), a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl), an alkenyl (preferably a C2-4 alkenyl), an alkynyl (preferably a C2-4 alkynyl), a heterocycloalkyl (preferably a C2-10 heterocycloalkyl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O, S or N; the C2-10 heterocycloalkyl is preferably a C2-5 heterocycloalkyl) or an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl);R3 is H, D, a halogen (preferably F, Cl, Br or I, more preferably F), an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl), an alkoxy (preferably a C1-4 alkoxy), an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl, more preferably a phenyl), a heteroaryl (preferably a C2-5 heteroaryl having 1-3 heteroatoms selected from N, O or S; the C2-10 heterocycloalkyl is preferably a C2-5 heterocycloalkyl) or an amino (); wherein the alkyl, the alkoxy, the aryl, the heteroaryl, the heterocycloalkyl or the amino can be further substituted by a substituent selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen (e.g. F, Cl, Br or I, preferably Cl), CN (e.g.an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl), an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl, more preferably phenyl), an aryl substituted by halogen(s) (preferably 2,6-dichlorophenyl), a benzyl, a benzyl substituted by halogen(s) on the benzene ring (preferably 2,6-dichlorobenzyl), a benzoyl or a benzoyl substituted by a halogen on the benzene ring (preferably 2,6-dichlorobenzoyl); when the number of the substituents is more than one, the substituents are the same or different;R4 is H, D, a halogen (e.g. F, Cl, Br or I, preferably F or Cl), CN, NH2, OH, an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl), an alkoxy (preferably a C1-4 alkoxy), a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl), an alkenyl (preferably a C2-4 alkenyl), an alkynyl (preferably a C2-4 alkynyl), a heterocycloalkyl (preferably a C2-10 heterocycloalkyl having 1-3 heteroatoms selected from N, S or O; the C2-10 heterocycloalkyl is preferably a C2-5 heterocycloalkyl), an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl, more preferably a phenyl or a naphthyl) or a heteroaryl (preferably a C2-10 heteroaryl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O, more preferablywherein the NH2, the OH, the alkyl, the alkoxy, the cycloalkyl, the alkenyl, the alkynyl, the heterocycloalkyl, the aryl or the heteroaryl can further be substituted by a substituent selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen (e.g. F, Cl, Br or I, preferably F or Cl), CN, an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl), an alkoxy (preferably a C1-4 alkoxy), a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl), an alkenyl (preferably a C2-4 alkenyl), an alkynyl (preferably a C2-4 alkynyl), a heterocycloalkyl (preferably a C2-10 heterocycloalkyl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O, S or N; the C2-10 heterocycloalkyl is preferably a C2-5 heterocycloalkyl), an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl), an aryl substituted by a halogen and/or CN (e.g.a heteroaryl (preferably a C2-10 heteroaryl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O) or a heteroaryl substituted by CN (e.g.each of R5 and R6 is independently H, D, OH, a halogen (e.g. F, Cl, Br or I, preferably F), an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl), CN, an alkoxy (preferably a C1-4 alkoxy), a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl), an alkenyl (preferably a C2-4 alkenyl), an alkynyl (preferably a C2-4 alkynyl) or a heterocycloalkyl (preferably a C2-10 heterocycloalkyl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O, S or N; the C2-10 heterocycloalkyl is preferably a C2-5 heterocycloalkyl); or R5, R6 together with the carbon atom attached form a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl) or a heterocyclic group (preferably a C2-5 heterocyclic group having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O or S); the alkyl, the alkoxy, the cycloalkyl, the alkenyl, the alkynyl, the heterocycloalkyl, the cycloalkyl formed by R5, R6 together with the carbon atom attached or the heteroalkyl formed by R5, R6 together with the carbon atom attached can further be substituted by a substituent selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen (e.g. F, Cl, Br or I, preferably Cl), CN, an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl), an alkoxy (preferably a C1-4 alkoxy), a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl), an alkenyl (preferably a C2-4 alkenyl), an alkynyl (preferably a C2-4 alkynyl), a heterocycloalkyl (preferably a C2-10 heterocycloalkyl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O, S or N; the C2-10 heterocycloalkyl is preferably a C2-5 heterocycloalkyl) or an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl); R7 is H or an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl);n is 0, 1 or 2;p is 1, 2, 3 or 4.
Each of the letter and the substituent in the condensed ring derivative having a structure of formula I is preferably as follows:M is H or a pharmaceutically acceptable cation;each of R1 and R2 is H, a halogen (e.g. F, Cl, Br or I, preferably F) or an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl); or R1, R2 together with the carbon atom attached form a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl, more preferably a cyclobutyl);R3 is H, a halogen (preferably F, Cl, Br or I, more preferably F), an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl) or an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl, more preferably a phenyl, wherein the C6-10 aryl can be further substituted by one or more than one CN(s), e.g.R4 is H, a halogen (preferably F, Cl, Br or I, more preferably F), an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl, wherein the C1-4 alkyl can be further substituted by an aryl substituted by halogen(s), e.g.an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl, more preferably a phenyl or a naphthyl, wherein the C6-10 aryl can be further substituted by one or more than one CN(s) and/or halogen(s) (preferably F, Cl, Br or I, more preferably F or CI), e.g.or a heteroaryl (preferably a C2-10 heteroaryl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O, more preferablywherein the C2-10 heteroaryl can be further substituted by one or more than one CN(s), e.g.each of R5 and R6 is independently H, a halogen (e.g. F, Cl, Br or I, preferably F), an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl) or OH;p is 1.
The condensed ring derivative I in the present invention, is more preferably a compound having a structure of formula II,wherein each of X1 and X2 is independently CH or N; X9 is CH or N; Y is CH or N; R1, R2, R3, R4, U, M, n and p are defined as above.
The condensed ring derivative I in the present invention, is more preferably a compound having a structure of formula III,wherein X3 isor N; X4 isN or S; X5 isor N; X6 isN or S; Y is CH or N; R1, R2, R3, R4, W, V, U, M and n are defined as above.
The condensed ring derivative I in the present invention, is more preferably a compound having a structure of formula IV,wherein X2 is CH or N; each of X7 and X8 is independently CH or S; R1, R2, R4, U, M and n are defined as above.
The compound having a structure of formula II in the present invention preferably has a structure of formula II-1,wherein X1, X9, Y, R1, R2, R4, U, M and n are defined as above.
In a preferred embodiment of the present invention, in the compound having a structure of formula II-1,or a heteroaryl (preferably a C2-10 heteroaryl having 1-2 heteroatoms selected from O, wherein the C2-10 heteroatom can be further substituted by one or more than one CN(s), e.g.U iseach of R5 and R6 is independently H or an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl);X1 and Y are C; X9 is C or N;each of R1 and R2 is independently H or an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl); or R1, R2 together with the carbon atom attached form a cycloalkyl (preferably a C3-6 cycloalkyl, more preferably a cyclobutyl);M is H;R4 is an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl, more preferably a phenyl or a naphthyl, wherein the C6-10 aryl can be further substituted by one or more than one CN(s) and/or halogen(s) (preferably F, Cl, Br or I, more preferably F or Cl), e.g.n is 1.
Preferably, in the compound having a structure of formula II-1, where U isand both of R5 and R6 are hydrogen, R1 and R2 are not H at the same time; where X9 is N, U is
The compound having a structure of formula III in the present invention preferably has a structure of formula III-1,wherein X3, X4, X5, Y, R1, R2, R3, R4, W, V, U, M and n are defined as above.
The compound having a structure of formula IV in the present invention preferably has a structure of formula IV-1,wherein X2, X7, X8, R1, R2, R4, R5, R6, M and n are defined as above.
In a preferred embodiment of the present invention, in the compound having a structure of formula IV-1,each of R5 and R6 is independently H or an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl);X2 is N;each of X7 and X8 is independently CH or S;each of R1 and R2 is independently H or an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl);R4 is an aryl (preferably a C6-10 aryl, more preferably a phenyl or a naphthyl, wherein the C6-10 aryl can be further substituted by one or more than one CN(s) and/or halogen(s) (preferably F, Cl, Br or I, more preferably F or CI), e.g.n is 0 or 1.
Preferably, X2 is N; X7 is CH; X8 is S.
Preferably, in the compound having a structure of formula IV-1, M is H.
Preferably, in the compound having a structure of formula IV-1, where R1 and/or R2 is an alkyl, R5 and R6 are H; where R5 and/or R6 is an alkyl, R1 and R2 are H.
Preferably, in the compound having a structure of formula IV-1, where X7 is S, X8 is CH, R1 and R2 are alkyl, and R5 and R6 are H, R4 is a phenyl.
The condensed ring derivative having a structure of formula I in the present invention is preferably selected from the compound consisting of
In the above compounds, the carbon marked with * is a chiral carbon or a non-chiral carbon; where it is a chiral carbon, it has S configuration or R configuration, where it is a non-chiral carbon, it is racemic.
The present invention also provides a process for preparing the condensed ring derivative having a structure of formula I, the tautomer, the mesomer, the racemate, the enantiomer, the diastereoisomer, or the pharmaceutically acceptable salt, the metabolite, the metabolic precursor or the pro-drug thereof, which can be synthesized according to the method known in the art with commercially available raw materials. In the present invention, the process for preparing the condensed ring derivative having a structure of formula I preferably comprises that in a solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the compound having a structure of formula I-a to give the compound having a structure of formula I;in formula I-a and I, ring A, R1, R2, R4, W, V, Z, Y, X, U, n and p are defined as above, in the compound having a structure of formula I-a, M1 is an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl). The method and condition of the hydrolysis reaction are common method and condition in the art, therefore, in the hydrolysis reaction, the solvent used and the amount thereof, the base used and the amount thereof, the temperature and time of the hydrolysis reaction, and the post treatment after the hydrolysis reaction can all be selected according to the common processes and conditions in the art. For example, the solvent can be a mixed solution of alcohols (e.g. methanol), ethers (e.g. THF) and water, or a mixed solution of alcohols (e.g. methanol) and water. The base can be alkalis hydroxide (e.g. LiOH and/or NaOH). Where a base is used, the base can be in the form of its aqueous solution (the molar concentration of the base aqueous solution can be 1mol/L). The hydrolysis reaction can be carried out at room temperature. The process of the hydrolysis reaction can be monitored by the common method in the art (e.g. TLC, GC, HPLC or NMR etc.). The post treatment can comprise that mixing the reaction solution obtained after the hydrolysis reaction with the hydrochloric acid aqueous solution (e.g. 2mol/L hydrochloric acid aqueous solution) and water (solid precipitated), filtering, washing the filtrate cake with water, drying under reduced pressure.
When M is a pharmaceutically acceptable cation, the compound having a structure of formula (I) wherein M is H can be neutralized by a hydroxide containing a pharmaceutically acceptable cation (e.g. sodium hydroxide). The conditions used in the process of a neutralizing reaction are common conditions used in the neutralizing reaction in the organic synthesis field.
The compound having a structure of formula I can be prepared according to the following process, comprising where U isthe compound having a structure of formula I can be prepared according to route I, which compriseswhere U isR6 is H and n is 1, the compound having a structure of formula I can be prepared according to route II, which compriseswhere U isboth R5 and R6 are H and n is 1, the compound having a structure of formula I can be prepared according to route III, which comprises
In the above three routes, each letter or group involved is defined as above. Meanwhile, the conditions and steps used in the chemical reactions involved in the above three routes can refer to the common conditions and steps used in the art, and the compound obtained according to the above process can further be modified in the peripheral region, thereby obtaining other target compound of the present invention.
The present invention also provides a compound having a structure of formula I-a:wherein, ring A, R1, R2, R4, W, V, Z, Y, X, U, n and p are defined as above; M1 is an alkyl (preferably a C1-4 alkyl).
The intermediate having a structure of formula I-a, further preferably has a structure of formula II-a:wherein, X1 and X2 are independently CH or N; X9 is CH or N; Y is CH or N; R1, R2, R3, R4, U, M1, n and p are defined as above.
In the present invention, the intermediate having a structure of formula I-a, preferably has a structure of formula III-a:wherein, X3 isor N; X4 isN or S; X5 isor N; X6 isN or S; Y is CH or N; R1, R2, R3, R4, W, V, U, M1 and n are defined as above.wherein, X2 is CH or N; X7 and X8 are independently CH or S; R1, R2, R4, U, M1 andn are defined as above.
In the present invention, the compound having a structure of formula II-a, preferably has a structure of formula II-a-1:wherein, X1, X9, Y, R1, R2, R4, U, M1 and n are defined as above.
In the present invention, the compound having a structure of formula III-a, preferably has a structure of formula III-a-1:wherein, X3, X4, X5, Y, R1, R2, R4, W, V, U, M1 and n are defined as above.
In the present invention, the compound having a structure of formula IV-a, preferably has a structure of formula IV-a-1:wherein, X2, X7, X8, R1, R2, R4, R5, R6, M1 and n are defined as above.
The intermediate having a structure of formula I-a, preferably is selected from the compound consisting of
In above compounds, the carbon marked with * is a chiral carbon or a non-chiral carbon; where it is a chiral carbon, it has S configuration or R configuration, where it is a non-chiral carbon, it is racemic.
The present invention also provides one of enantiomers contained in the racemic compound 7-a, which is given by separating the racemic compound 7-a by an enantiomeric chromatographic column:wherein the chromatograph is preferably Gilson 281, the preparative column is preferably r, r-Whelk-O1 (20×250 mm, 5 µm), the mobile phase is preferably Hexane : EtOH : DEA = 70 : 30 : 0.1 (v/v/v); when the retaining time is 9.0 min, one enantiomer 7A-a is given; when the retaining time is 11.0 min, the other enantiomer 7B-a is given.
The present invention also provides one of enantiomers contained in the racemate 7:wherein the process for preparing one enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the enantiomer 7A-a; the process for preparing the other enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the enantiomer 7B-a.
The present invention also provides one of the enantiomers contained in the racemate 42-a, which is given by separating the racemate 42-a by an enantiomeric chromatographic column:wherein the chromatograph is preferably SFC-80 (Thar, Waters), the preparative column is preferably AD 30×250mm, 5µm (Decial), the mobile phase is preferably n-Hexane-0.1 % DEA : EtOH-0.1%DEA = 80 : 20 (v/v); when the retaining time is 18.0 min, one enantiomer 43A-a is given; when the retaining time is 20.0 min, the other enantiomer 43B-a is given.
The present invention also provides one of the enantiomers contained in the racemate 42:wherein the process for preparing one enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the enantiomer 43A-a; the process for preparing the other enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the antimer 43B-a.
The present invention also provides one of the enantiomers contained in the racemate 44-a, which is given by separating the racemate 44-a by an enantiomeric chromatographic column:wherein the chromatograph is preferably Gilson 281, the preparative column is preferably r, r-Whelk-01 (20×250 mm, 5 µm), the mobile phase is preferably n-Hexane : EtOH : DEA = 70 : 30 : 0.1 (v/v/v); when the retaining time is 6.0 min, one enantiomer 44A-a is given; when the retaining time is 7.0 min, the other enantiomer 44B-a is given.
The present invention provides one of the enantiomers contained in the racemate 44:wherein the process for preparing one enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the antimer 44A-a; the process for preparing the other enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the antimer 44B-a.
The present invention provides one of the enantiomers contained in the racemate 45-a, which is given by separating the racemate 45-a by an enantiomeric chromatographic column:wherein the chromatograph is preferably SFC-80 (Thar, Waters), the preparative column is preferably AD 30×250mm, 5µm (Decial), the mobile phase is preferably CO2 : (Methanol-0.1%NH4OH) = 65 : 35 (v/v); when the retaining time is 8.5 min, one enantiomer 45A-a is given; when the retaining time is 10.5 min, the other enantiomer 45B-a is given.
The present invention provides one of the enantiomers contained in the racemate 45:wherein the process for preparing one enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the antimer 45A-a; the process for preparing the other enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the enantiomer 45B-a.
The present invention provides one of the enantiomers contained in the racemate 46-a, which is given by separating the racemate 46-a by an enantiomeric chromatographic column:wherein the chromatograph is preferably Gilson 281, the preparative column is preferably r, r-Whelk-01 (20×250 mm, 5 µm), the mobile phase is preferably Hexane : EtOH : DEA = 80 : 20 : 0.1 (v/v/v); when the retaining time is 14.0 min, one enantiomer 46A-a is given; when the retaining time is 18.0 min, the other antimer 46B-a is given.
The present invention provides one of the enantiomers contained in the racemate 46:wherein the process for preparing one enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the enantiomer 46A-a; the process for preparing the other enantiomer preferably comprises that in an organic solvent, in the presence of a base, carrying out a hydrolysis reaction on the enantiomer 46B-a.
The present invention also provides one of the enantiomers included in the racemate 53, the process for preparing one enantiomer preferably comprises, in water, neutralizing the enantiomer 45A by NaOH.
The present invention also provides a use of the condensed ring derivative having a structure of formula I, the tautomer, the mesomer, the racemate, the enantiomer, the diastereoisomer, or the pharmaceutically acceptable salt, the metabolite, the metabolic precursor or the pro-drug thereof in manufacturing a medicament for preventing and/or treating hyperuricemia or its related diseases. The hyperuricemia related diseases generally include gout, hypertension, diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, metabolic syndrome, coronary heart disease and renal damage and so on.
The present invention also provides a pharmaceutical composition, which comprises therapeutically effective amount of the condensed ring derivative having a structure of formula I, the tautomer, the mesomer, the racemate, the enantiomer, the diastereoisomer, or the pharmaceutically acceptable salt, the metabolite, the metabolic precursor or the pro-drug thereof, and one or more than one pharmaceutically acceptable carrier and/or diluter.
In the present invention, the pharmaceutical composition can be in the form of an oral administration, as well as a sterile injectable aqueous solution, which can be prepared according to any known process for preparing pharmaceutical composition in the art.
The pharmaceutical composition can be used alone, as well as in combination with other medicament having activity on lowering uric acid. The medicament having activity on lowering uric acid is selected from the group consisting of uric acid transporter 1 inhibitor, Xanthine oxidase inhibitor, Xanthine oxidoreductase and Xanthine dehydrogenase inhibitor, preferably Allopurinol and/or Febuxostat.
The present invention also provides a method for preventing and/or treating hyperuricemia or its related diseases, the method comprises administrating proactively effective amount and/or therapeutically effective amount of the condensed ring derivative having a structure of formula I, the tautomer, the mesomer, the racemate, the enantiomer, the diastereoisomer, or the pharmaceutically acceptable salt, the metabolite, the metabolic precursor or the pro-drug thereof to the subject, or administrating proactively effective amount and/or therapeutically effective amount of the pharmaceutical composition of the present invention to the subject.
Unless otherwise specified, the terms involved in the description and the claims of the present invention have following definitions:"Alkyl" used herein (including used alone and contained in other groups) refers to a saturated linear and branched aliphatic hydrocarbyl containing 1-20 carbon atoms, preferably containing 1-10 carbon atoms, more preferably containing 1-8 carbon atoms, such as methyl, ethyl, n-propyl, iso-propyl, n-butyl, tert-butyl, iso-butyl, pentyl, hexyl, heptyl, octyl, nonyl, decyl, 4,4-dimethylpentyl, 2,2,4-trimethylpentyl, undecyl, dodecyl, and isomers thereof; as well as the alkyl containing 1-4 substituents (with no further substitutions) selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen (preferably F, Br, Cl or I), an alkyl, an alkoxy, an aryl, an aryloxy, an aryl or diaryl substituted by an aryl, an aralkyl, an aralkoxy, an alkenyl, an alkynyl, a cycloalkyl, a cycloalkenyl, a cycloalkyl alkyl, a cycloalkyl alkoxy, an optionally substituted amino, a hydroxyl, a hydroxyl alkyl, an acyl, an aldehyde group, a heteroaryl, a heteroaryloxy, a heterocycloalkyl, a heterocycloalkoxy, an aryl heteroaryl, an arylalkoxycarbonyl, a heteroarylalkyl, a heteroarylalkoxy, an aryloxyalkyl, an aryloxyaryl, an alkylamino, an amido, an arylcarbonylamino, a nitro, a nitrile group, a sulphydryl, a haloalkyl, a trihaloalkyl and/or an alkylthio. In the present invention, "Cx1-Cy1" alkyl (x1 and y1 are integers) having indicated number of carbon atoms, such as "C1-4 alkyl", has the same definition of the "alkyl" described in this paragraph, except for the number of carbon atoms.
"Alkylidene" used herein (including used alone and contained in other groups) refers to a sub-saturated linear and branched aliphatic hydrocarbyl containing 1-20 carbon atoms, preferably containing 1-10 carbon atoms, more preferably containing 1-8 carbon atoms, such as methylene, ethylidene, propylidene, iso-propylidene, n-butylidene, tert-butylidene, iso-butylidene, pentylidene, hexylidene, heptylidene, octylidene, nonylidene, decylidene, bis(4,4-dimethylpentyl), bis(2,2,4-trimethylpentyl), undecylidene, dodecylidene, and the isomers thereof; including the alkylidene containing 1-4 substituents (without further substituents) selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen (preferably F, Br, Cl or I), an alkyl, an alkoxy, an aryl, an aryloxy, an aryl or diaryl substituted by an aryl, an aralkyl, an aralkoxy, an alkenyl, an alkynyl, an cycloalkyl, an cycloalkenyl, an cycloalkylalkyl, an cycloalkylalkoxy, an optionally substituted amino, an hydroxyl, an hydroxyalkyl, an acyl, an aldehyde group, an heteroaryl, an heteroaryloxy, an heterocycloalkyl, an heterocycloalkoxy, an arylheteroaryl, an arylalkoxycarbonyl, an heteroarylalkyl, an heteroarylalkoxy, an aryloxyalkyl, an aryloxyaryl, an alkylamino, an amido, an arylcarbonylamino, a nitro, a nitrile group, a sulphydryl, a haloalkyl, a trihaloalkyl and/or an alkylthio; one or more than one substituents together with the alkylidene can form a ring, thereby forming a fused ring or a spiro ring.
The term "aliphatic ring" or "cycloalkyl" (including used alone and contained in other groups) includes saturated or partially unsaturated (containing 1 or 2 double bonds) cyclic hydrocarbon group containing 1-3 rings, including monocycloalkyl, bicycloalkyl and tricycloalkyl which contains 3-20 carbon atoms which can form a ring, preferably contains 3-10 carbon atoms, e.g. cyclopropyl, cyclobutyl, cyclopentyl, cyclohexyl, cycloheptyl, cyclooctyl, cyclodecyl and cyclododecyl, cyclohexenyl; the cycloalkyl can be substituted by any of 1-4 substituents (without further substitutions) selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen, an alkyl, an alkoxy, a hydroxyl, an aryl, an aryloxy, an aralkyl, a cycloalkyl, an alkylamino, an amido, an oxo, an acyl, an arylcarbonylamino, an amino, a nitro, a nitrile group, a sulphydryl and/or an alkylthio and/or any alkyl group.
The term "alkoxy" refers to a cyclic or non-cyclic alkyl having indicated number of carbon atoms linked by an oxygen bridge. Therefore, "alkoxy" includes the definitions of the alkyl and the cycloalkyl.
The term "alkenyl" refers to a linear, branched or cyclic non-aryl hydrocarbyl having indicated carbon atoms and at least one carbon-carbon double bond. Preferably, it has one carbon-carbon double bond and can exist up to four non-aryl carbon-carbon double bonds. Therefore, "C2-12 alkenyl" refers to an alkenyl having 2-12 carbon atoms. "C2-6 alkenyl" refers to an alkenyl having 2-6 carbon atoms, including vinyl, propenyl, butenyl, 2-methyl butenyl and cyclohexenyl. The linear, branched and cyclic part of the alkenyl can contain a double bond, and if it is a substituted alkenyl, the alkenyl can be substituted (but the substituent with no further substitution).
The term "alkynyl" refers to a linear, branched or cyclic hydrocarbyl having indicated carbon atoms and at least one carbon-carbon triple bond. It can have up to three carbon-carbon triple bonds. Therefore, "C2-12 alkynyl" refers to an alkynyl having 2-12 carbon atoms. "C2-6 alkynyl" refers to an alkynyl having 2-6 carbon atoms, including ethynyl, propynyl, butynyl and 3-methyl butynyl etc.
The term "aryl" used herein refers to any stable monocyclic or bicyclic carbon rings which can have up to 7 atoms in each ring, and at least one of the rings is an aromatic ring. The typical aryl unit includes phenyl, naphthyl, tetrahydronaphthyl, 2, 3-dihydroindenyl, biphenyl, phenanthryl, anthryl or acenaphthyl. It can be understood that where the aryl is a bicyclic group and one of the ring is a non-aromatic ring, the linkage is through the aromatic ring. The aryl also includes any of 1-4 substituents (without further substitutions) selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen (F, Br Cl or I), an alkyl, an alkoxy, an aryl, an aryloxy, an aryl or diaryl substituted by an aryl, an aralkyl, an aralkoxy, an alkenyl, an alkynyl, a cycloalkyl, a cycloalkenyl, a cycloalkylalkyl, a cycloalkylalkoxy, an optionally substituted amino, a hydroxyl, a hydroxyalkyl, an acyl, an aldehyde group, a heteroaryl, a heteroaryloxy, a heterocycloalkyl, a heterocycloalkoxy, an arylheteroaryl, an arylalkoxycarbonyl, a heteroarylalkyl, a heteroarylalkoxy, an aryloxyalkyl, an aryloxyaryl, an alkylamino, an acylamino, an arylcarbonylamino, a nitro, a nitrile group, a sulphydryl, a haloalkyl, a trihaloalkyl and/or an alkylthio.
The term "halogen" refers to F, Cl, Br, I or At.
The term "hydroxyl" refers to
The term "amino" refers to
The term "cyano" refers to
The term "carboxyl" refers to
The term "sulfonyl" refers to
The term "acyl" refers toa univalence group derived from an organic or inorganic oxygenic acid cleaving a hydroxyl off.
The term "haloalkyl" refers to an alkyl substituted by halogen at any position. Therefore, "haloalkyl" includes the definitions of the halogen and the alkyl.
The term "haloalkoxy" refers to an alkoxy substituted by halogen at any position. Therefore, "haloalkoxy" includes the definitions of the halogen and the alkoxy.
The term "aryloxy" refers to an aryl having indicated number of carbon atoms linked by an oxygen bridge. Therefore, "aryloxy" includes the definition of the aryl.
The term "aromatic hetero group" or "heteroaryl" used herein refers to a stable monocycle or bicycle which can have up to 7 atoms in each ring, and at least one of the rings is an aromatic ring containing 1-4 heteroatoms selected from O, N and S. The heteroaryl defined herein includes but not limited to acridinyl, carbazolyl, cinnolinyl, quinoxalinyl, pyrazolyl, indolyl, benzotriazolyl, furanyl, thienyl, benzothienyl, benzofuranyl, quinolinyl, isoquinolyl, oxazolyl, isoxazolyl, indolyl, pyrazinyl, pyridazinyl, pyridyl, pyrimidyl, pyrryl, tetrahydroquinoline. As defined in the heterocyclo, "heteroaryl" can also be understood including the N-Oxide derivative of any N-containing heteroaryl. Where the heteroaryl is a bicyclic group and one of the rings is a non-aromatic ring or without any heteroatom, it can be understood, the linkage is through the aryl or the ring containing the heteroatom. The heteroaryl can be substituted by any of 1-4 substituents selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen, an alkyl, an alkoxy, a hydroxyl, an aryl, an aryloxy, an aralkyl, a cycloalkyl, an alkylamino, an acylamino, an acyl, an arylcarbonylamino, an amino, a nitro, a nitrile group, a sulphydryl and/or an alkylthio and/or any of alkyl group.
The term "heterocyclo" or "heterocyclic group" used herein refers to a 5-10 membered aromatic or non-aromatic heterocycle having 1-4 heteroatoms selected from O, N and S, including bicyclic group. Therefore, "heterocyclic group" includes the aryl and the dihydro- or tetrahydro- analogues thereof. The embodiments of the "heterocyclic group" include but not limited to benzimidazolyl, benzofuranyl, benzofurazinyl, benzopyrazolyl, benzotriazolyl, benzothienyl, benzoxazolyl, carbazyl, carbazolyl, cinnolinyl, furanyl, imidazolyl, indolinyl, indolyl, indazolyl, isobenzofuranyl, pseudoindolyl, isoquinolyl, isothiazolyl, isoxazolyl, naphthalene pyrimidinyl, oxadiazolyl, oxazolyl, oxazoline, isoxazoline, oxycyclobutyl, pyranyl, pyrazinyl, pyrazolyl, pyridazinyl, pyridopyridyl, pyridazinyl, pyridyl, pyrimidyl, pyrryl, quinazolyl, quinolyl, quinoxalinyl, tetrahydropyranyl, tetrazolyl, tetrazolopyridyl, thiadiazolyl, thiazolyl, thienyl, triazolyl, azetidinyl, 1,4-dioxanyl, hexahydroazepinyl, piperazinyl, piperidinyl, pyrrolidinyl, morpholinyl, thiomorpholinyl, dihydrobenzimidazolyl, dihydrobenzofuranyl, dihydrobenzothienyl, dihydrobenzoxazolyl, dihydrofuranyl, dihydroimidazolyl, dihydroindolyl, dihydroisoxazolyl, dihydroisothiazolyl, dihydrooxadiazolyl, dihydrooxazolyl, dihydropyrazinyl, dihydropyrazolyl, dihydropyridyl, dihydropyrimidinyl, dihydropyryl, dihydroquinolyl, dihydrotetrazolyl, dihydrothiadiazolyl, dihydrothiazolyl, dihydrothienyl, dihydrotriazolyl, dihydro-azetidinyl, methylenedioxybenzoyl, tetrahydrofuranyl, tetrahydrothienyl and N-Oxide thereof. The heterocyclo (without further substitution) can link with other groups by its carbon atom or heteroatom.
The term "cycloheteroaliphatic" or "heterocycloalkyl" used herein alone or contained in other groups refers to a saturated or partially unsaturated 4-12 membered ring having 1-4 heteroatoms (e.g. N, O and/or S). The heterocycloalkyl can contain 1-4 substituents (without further substitution), such as an alkyl, a halogen, an oxo and/or any of alkyl list above. Besides, any heterocycloalkyl can fuse to a cycloalkyl, an aryl, a heteroaryl or a heterocycloalkyl. The heterocycloalkyl can link to other groups through its carbon atom or heteroatom.
The term "aromatic ring" used herein refers to any stable monocyclic or bicyclic carbon rings which can have up to 7 atoms in each ring and at least one of the ring is an aromatic ring. The embodiments of the aromatic unit include phenyl, naphthyl, tetrahydronaphthyl, 2, 3-dihydroindenyl, biphenyl, phenanthryl, anthryl or acenaphthyl. It can be understood that when the aryl is a bicyclic group and one of the ring is a non-aromatic ring, the linkage is through "aromatic ring". The aromatic ring includes any of 1-4 substituents (without further substitution) selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen (F, Br, Cl or I), an alkyl, an alkoxy, an aryl, an aryloxy, an aryl or biaryl substituted with an aryl, an aralkyl, an aralkoxy, an alkenyl, an alkynyl, a cycloalkyl, a cycloalkenyl, a cycloalkylalkyl, a cycloalkylalkoxy, an amino, a hydroxyl, a hydroxyalkyl, an acyl, an aldehyde group, a heteroaryl, a heteroaryloxy, a heterocycloalkyl, a heterocycloalkoxy, an arylheteroaryl, an arylalkoxycarbonyl, a heteroarylalkyl, a heteroarylalkoxy, an aryloxyalkyl, an aryloxyaryl, an alkylamino, an acylamino, an arylcarbonylamino, a nitro, a nitrile group, a sulphydryl, a haloalkyl, a trihaloalkyl and/or an alkylthio.
The term "heteroaryl" or "aromatic heterocyclo" used herein refers to a stable monocyclic or bicyclic group which can have up to 7 atoms in each ring and at least one of the ring is an aromatic ring having 1-4 heteroatoms selected from O, N and S. In this definition, the heteroaryl includes but not limited to acridine, carbazole, cinnoline, carboline, quinoxaline, imidazole, pyrazole, pyrrole, indole, indoline, benzotriazole, benzimidazole, furan, thiophen, isothiazole, benzothiophene, dihydrobenzothiophene, benzofuran, isobenzofuran, benzoxazole, benzofuraxan, benzopyrazole, quinoline, isoindoline, isoquinoline, oxazole, oxadiazole, isoxazole, indole, pyrazine, pyridopyridine, tetrazolopyridine, pyridazine, pyridine, naphthalene pyrimidine, pyrimidine, pyrrole, tetrazole, thiadiazole, thiazole, thiophene, triazole, quinazoline, tetrahydroquinoline, dihydrobenzimidazole, dihydrobenzofuran, dihydrobenzoxazole, dihydroquinoline. As defined in the definition of heterocycle, "heteroaryl" is also understood to include N-Oxide derivatives of any N-containing heteroaryl. Where the heteroaryl is a bicyclic group and one of the ring is a non-aromatic ring or without any heteroatom, it can be understood that the linkage is through the aryl or the heteroatom contained in the ring. The heteroaryl can be substituted by any of 1-4 substituents (without further substitutions) selected from the group consisting of D, a halogen, an alkyl, an alkoxy, a hydroxyl, an aryl, an aryloxy, an aralkyl, a cycloalkyl, an alkylamino, an acylamino, an acyl, an arylcarbonylamino, an amino, a nitro, a nitrile group, a sulphydryl and/or an alkylthio and/or any alkyl defined in the present invention.
"Proactively effective amount and/or therapeutically effective amount" refers to an amount of the compound administered to a subject sufficient to prevent and/or treat the diseases involved in the present invention. Though the proactively effective amount and/or therapeutically effective amount of the compound depends on the compound, the condition and its severity, and the age of the subject to be treated, it can be determined by the person skilled in the art according to the common method.
As used in the present invention, when the specific salt, pharmaceutical composition, composition, excipient are mentioned to be "pharmaceutically acceptable", it means that the salt, pharmaceutical composition, composition, excipient are generally non-toxic, safe and suitable to be administered to the subject; the subject is preferably a mammal, more preferably human.
The term "pharmaceutically acceptable salt" as used herein refers to a pharmaceutically acceptable organic or inorganic salt of the compound of the present invention. Typical embodiments are include but not limited to sulfate, citrate, acetate, oxalate, chloride, bromide, iodide, nitrate, bisulfate, phosphate, acid phosphate, isonicotinate, lactate, salicylate, acid citrate, tartrate, oleate, tannate, pantothenate, bitartrate, ascorbate, succinate, maleate, gentisate, fumarate, gluconate, glucuronate, saccharate, formate, benzoate, glutamate, methylsulfonate, ethylsulfonate, benzene sulfonate, tosilate, embonate (i.e. 1 -1 -methylene-bis(2-hydroxyl-3-naphthoate)).
As used herein, unless otherwise specified, the term "prodrug" refers to a derivative of a compound containing biological reactive functional groups, which can be cleaved from the compound or react in other ways to provide the compound under biological condition (in vivo or in vitro). Generally, the prodrug does not have activity, or have less activity than the compound itself, this makes the compound exhibit effects until the biological reactive functional group cleaved from the compound. The biological reactive functional group can hydrolyze or oxidize under biological condition to provide the compound. For example, the prodrug can include biologically hydrolysable groups. The biologically hydrolysable groups include but not limited to biologically hydrolysable phosphate, biologically hydrolysable ester, biologically hydrolysable amide, biologically hydrolysable carbonate, biologically hydrolysable carbamate and biologically hydrolysable uride.
The compound of the present invention can contain one or more than one asymmetric centers ("stereoisomers"). As used herein, the term "stereoisomers" refers to Cis- and Trans- isomer, R- and S- antimer and diastereomer. These stereoisomers can be prepared by asymmetric synthesis or chiral separation (e.g. isolating, crystallizing, TLC, column chromatography, gas chromatography, HPLC). These stereoisomers can also derive from the diastereomer obtained from reacting a mixture of the enantiomers or racemate with a proper chiral compound, followed by crystallizing or conducting any other proper common method.
As used herein, the term "subject" refers to any animal to be administered or have been administered with the compound or the pharmaceutical composition according to the embodiment of the present invention, preferably a mammal, most preferably human. As used herein, the term "mammal" includes any mammal. Typical mammal includes but not limited to cattle, horse, sheep, pig, cat, dog, mouse, rat, rabbit, Guinea pig, monkey, human and so on, human is the most preferable.
In one embodiment, "treat" or "treating" refers to an improvement, prevention or reversion of a disease or a condition or at least one distinguished symptom thereof. In another embodiment, "treat" or "treating" refers to an improvement, prevention or reversion of at least one of measurable body parameters of a disease or a condition which is being treated, which may not been distinguished in a mammal. However, in another embodiment, "treat" or "treating" refers to slowing the development of a disease or a condition, or refers to stabilizing in body, such as a recognizable symptom, or refers to stabilizing in physiology, such as body parameters, or refers to both. In another embodiment, treat" or "treating" refers to slowing the initiation of a disease or a condition.
In certain embodiments, the claimed compound is administered for prevention. As used herein, "prevent" or "preventing" refers to lowering a risk of having a disease or a condition. In a preferred embodiment, administering an indicated compound to a subject for a preventive purpose, such as the subject having a tendency to catch or having a family history of cancer or autoimmune diseases.
In the present invention, abbr. "Abs" refers to the absolute configuration of the chiral carbon atom contained in the compound is unknown, indicating S-configuration or R-configuration.
In the present invention, 0.1% DEA refers to that DEA volume accounts for 0.1% volume of the mixture solution containing DEA, for example, in Hexane-0.1% DEA, 0.1% DEA refers to that DEA volume accounts for 0.1% total volume of Hexane and DEA. Additionally, the definition of 0.1% NH4OH is the same as that of 0.1% DEA.
In the present invention, room temperature refers to ambient temperature, generally refers to 10-30°C.
Without departing from the common knowledge in the art, the optimized embodiments can be obtained by optionally combining the preferred conditions above.
The reagents and raw materials are commercially available.
The positive effects achieved by the present invention lie in that:the present invention provides a condensed ring derivative which is totally distinguished from the prior art, the preparation method, the intermediate, the pharmaceutical composition and the use thereof. The condensed ring derivative of the present invention has distinct inhibitory effects against URAT1, which can relieve or treat hyperuricemia etc. and related diseases.
Detailed description of the preferred embodiment
The structure of the compound is determined by NMR or MS, NMR is obtained by Bruker Avance-500 apparatus, d6-DMSO, CDCl3 and CD3OD etc. as a solvent, TMS as an interior label. MS is obtained by LC-MS Agilent Technologies 6110, ESI as an ion source.
Microwave reaction is conducted in Explorer full automatic microwave irradiation equipment supplied by CEM, US Corporation, magnetron frequency is 2450MHz, continuous microwave output power is 300W.
HPLC is Gilson 281, the preparative column is Xbridge, 21.2×250mm C18, 10µm.
Process I for separating enantiomers: the apparatus is Gilson 281, the preparative column is r,r-Whelk-O1 (20×250mm, 5µM); process II: the apparatus is SFC-80 (Thar, Waters), the preparative column is AD 30×250mm, 5µm (Decial).
Embodiment 1
4-(4-cyanophenyl)isoquinoline-6-carboxylic acid (Compound 1)
Synthesis of compound 1-c
Under CO atmosphere (30 atm), 6-bromoisoquinoline (10.0g, 48mmol), sodium acetate (5.0g, 61mmol), triphenylphosphine (3.8g, 14mmol) and palladium acetate (2.8g, 12mmol) were dissolved in DMF (40mL) and methanol (40mL), the mixture was reacted at 100°C for 24hrs. The mixture was then cooled to room temperature, evaporated to remove methanol, the residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (200mL). The filtrate was washed in turn with water (100 mL×3) and saturated brine (100 mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE: EA = 10:1) to give white solid 1-c (7g, yield: 78%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 188 [M+H]+
Synthesis of compound 1-b
Compound 1-c (1.88g, 10mmol) and N-bromosuccinimide (2.7g, 15mmol) were dissolved in acetic acid (40mL), the mixture was cooled to room temperature after reacting at 80°C for 24hrs. Part of acetic acid was removed under reduced pressure, the residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with DCM (200mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with saturated sodium sulfite solution (200mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 50:1) to give colorless solid 1-b (2.5g, yield 94%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 266 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 1-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 1-b (133mg, 0.5mmol), 4-cyanophenylboronic acid (75mg, 0.5mmol) and sodium carbonate (60mg, 0.6mmol) were suspended in a mixed solution of dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene] palladium dichloride (25mg, 0.03mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, then cooled to room temperature. The mixture was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 1-a (126mg, yield 83%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 289 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 1
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1.0mmol) was added to a solution of compound 1-a (120mg, 0.42mmol) in a mixed solution of methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aqueous solution (1mL) and water (20mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 1 (91mg, yield 79%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 295 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 13.55 (s, 1H), 9.53 (s, 1H), 8.60 (s, 1H), 8.34 (m, 2H), 8.21 (m, 1H), 8.10 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.82 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H) ppm.
Embodiment 2
3-[4-(4-Cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl]propionic acid (Compound 2)
Synthesis of compound 2-d
A solution of compound 1-c (1.33g, 5mmol) in DCM (50mL) was cooled to -78°C, 1.0M diisobutylaluminum hydride in DCM (20mL, 20mmol) was slowly added dropwise, the mixture was further stirred for 1h. The mixture was warmed to room temperature, saturated aqueous solution of NH4Cl (300mL) was added, organic phase was seperated, aqueous phase was extracted with DCM (50mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give light yellow solid 2-d (900 mg, yield 76%).LC-MS (ESI): m/z =236 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 2-c
At 0°C, triethyl phosphonoacetate (1.4mL, 5mmol) and sodium hydride (240mg, 6mmol) were added into a solution of compound 2-d (470mg, 2mmol) in THF (lOmL), the mixture was further stirred for 1h. The mixture was warmed to room temperature, followed by adding saturated aqueous solution of NH4Cl (300mL), extracted with EA (50mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give light yellow solid 2-c (380mg, yield 62%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =306 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 2-b
At 0°C, NaBH4 (40mg, 1mmol) was added slowly into a solution of compound 2-c (310mg, 1mmol) and NiCl2 (13mg, 0.1mmol) in methanol (5mL), the mixture was further stirred for 3hrs. The mixture was warmed to room temperature, followed by adding saturated aqueous solution of NH4Cl (30mL), being extracted with EA (10mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (5mL×3) and saturated brine (5mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 4:1) to give light yellow solid 2-b (280mg, yield 91%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =308 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 2-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 2-b (155mg, 0.5mmol), 4-cyanophenylboronic acid (75mg, 0.5mmol) and sodium carbonate (106mg, 1mmol) were suspended in a mixture of dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis (diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (40mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, then cooled to room temperature. The mixture was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 2-a (100mg, yield 61%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 331 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 2
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1.0mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 2-a (100mg, 0.3mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL), the mixture was further stirred for 1h, 2M HCl aqueous solution (1mL) and water (20mL) were added, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (lOmL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 2 (61mg, yield 67%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 303 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.18 (s, 1H), 9.34 (s, 1H), 8.44 (s, 1H), 8.18 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.04 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.77 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.68 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 2.99 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 2.59 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H) ppm.
Embodiment 3
2-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]acetic acid (Compound 3)
Synthesis of compound 3-d
CuCN (5.0g, 56.3mmol) was added to a solution of 1,4-dibromonaphthalene (20g, 70.4mmol) in DMF (250mL), the mixture was reacted for 16hrs at 125°C, evaporated under reduced pressure. Aqueous ammonia (200mL) and EA (200mL) were added to the residue, the mixture was stirred for 1h and organic phase was seperated. The organic phase was in turn washed with water (100mL×3) and saturated brine (100mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 3-d (5.1g, yield 31%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 232 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 3-c
Under N2 atmosphere, bis(pinacolato)diboron (8.4g, 33mmol), potassium acetate (6.5g, 66mmol) and [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (1.2g, 1.76mmol) were respectively added to a solution of compound 3-d (5.1g, 22mmol) in dioxane (150mL), the mixture was stirred at 80°C for 6hrs. The mixture was evaporated under reduced pressure, the residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with dioxane (50mL), the filtrate was evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 3-c (6 g, yield 97%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 280 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 3-b
At 0°C, under N2 atmosphere, potassium tert-butanolate (71mg, 0.63mmol) was added to a solution of methyl(methylthiomethyl)sulfoxide (78mg, 0.63mmol) in anhydrous THF (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 30mins, followed by adding compound 2-d (100mg, 0.42mmol), stirred for 1h at room temperature, then evaporated under reduced pressure. 2M HCl in methanol (5mL) was added to the residue, the mixture was refluxed for 3hrs, then concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give compound 3-b (70 mg, yield 60%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 281 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 3-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 3-c (40mg, 0.14mmol), sodium carbonate (46mg, 0.43mmol) and [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (30mg, 0.036mmol) were respectively added to a mixed solution of compound 3-b (40mg, 0.14mmol) in ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (150mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred at 75°C for 16hrs, and then concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 3-a (27 mg, yield 53%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 353 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 3
At room temperature, 1M LiOH aqueous solution (1.0mL) was added to a mixed solution of compound 3-a (27mg, 0.076mmol) in methanol (5mL) and THF (5mL), the mixture was stirred for 16hrs, and evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved with water (6mL), adjusted to pH=3 with 1M citric acid aqueous solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 3 (20mg, yield 77%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 339 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.34 (s, br., 1H), 9.47 (s, 1H), 8.45 (s, 1H), 8.35 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.24 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.85 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.73 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.64 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.59 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.41 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.14 (s, 1H), 3.63 (s, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 4
2{[4-(4-Cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio-2-methylpropionic acid (Compound 4)
Synthesis of compound 4-c
6-Bromoisoquinoline (10.4g, 50mmol) and N-iodosuccinimide (13.5g, 60mmol) were dissolved in acetic acid (100mL), the mixture was reacted for 8hrs at 80°C. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, followed by concentrating under reduced pressure to remove half of acetic acid, the residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with DCM (200mL), the organic phase was in turn washed with saturated sodium sulfite solution (200mL) and water (100mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give compound 4-c (11.6g, yield 70%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 334 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 4-b
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 4-c (2.33g, 10mmol), 4-cyanobenzene boronic acid (1.5g, 10mmol) and sodium carbonate (2.12g, 20mmol) were suspended in dioxane (40mL) and water (lOmL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (0.55g, 1mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, and then cooled to room temperature. The mixture was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (100mL×3) and saturated brine (100mL), dried over magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 4-b (1.6g, yield 52%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 309 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 4-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (0.29g, 0.5mmol) and 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (0.46mg, 0.5mmol) were added to a solution of compound 4-b (1.5g, 5mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (0.75g, 5mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (1.29g, 1mmol) in dioxane (8mL), the mixture was reacted in microwave at 110°C for 30mins. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove dioxane. The residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (200mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (100mL×3) and saturated brine (100mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 4-a (1.39g, yield 74%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 377 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 4
At room temperature, LiOH (0.178g, 0.74mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 4-a (1.39g, 0.37mmol) in methanol (5mL), THF (20mL) and water (5mL), the mixture was stirred at room temperature for 1h, 2M HCl aqueous solution (2mL) and water (20mL) were added, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 4 (1.1g, yield 85%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 349 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.78 (s, 1H), 9.41 (s, 1H), 8.53 (s, 1H), 8.23 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.06 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.73 (m, 4H), 1.44 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 5
2{[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio}-2-methylpropionic acid (Compound 5)
Synthesis of compound 5-b
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 4-c (0.66g, 2mmol), compound 3-c (0.56g, 2mmol) and sodium carbonate (0.42g, 0.4mmol) were suspended in dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (0.12g, 0.2mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, and then cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, washed with EA (20mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 5-b (0.46g, yield 64%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 359 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 5-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (0.06g, 0.1mmol) and 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (0.1g, 0.1mmol) were added to a solution of compound 5-b (0.36g, 1mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (0.15g, 1mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (0.26g, 2mmol) in dioxane (8mL), the mixture was reacted in a microwave at 110°C for 30mins. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, and then concentrated under reduced pressure to remove dioxane, the residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (50mL×3) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 5-a (0.37g, yield 87%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 427 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 5
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 5-a (370mg, 0.86mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL), the mixture was stirred for 1h, and then 2M HCl aqueous solution (2mL) and water (20mL) were added, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (lOmL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 5 (280mg, yield 82%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 399 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.67 (s, 1H), 9.51 (s, 1H), 8.57 (s, 1H), 8.35 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 8.27(m, 2H), 7.85 (t, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.75 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.66 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.60 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.41 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.26 (s, 1H), 1.27 (s, 3H), 1.24 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 6
2{[4-(4-Cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl]oxy}-2-methylpropionic acid (Compound 6)
Synthesis of compound 6-c
Under N2 atmosphere, bis(pinacolato)diboron (3.1g, 12mmol), potassium acetate (2.0g, 20mmol) and [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (0.56g, 1mmol) were respectively added to a solution of compound 4-b (3.1g, 10mmol) in dioxane (15mL), the mixture was stirred at 80°C for 8hrs. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (50mL×3) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give white solid 6-c (1.76 g, yield 63%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 275 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 6-b
At 0°C, 30% H2O2 solution (2mL) was added to a solution of compound 6-c (1.1g, 4mmol) in THF (20mL), the mixture was stirred for 4hrs before water (100mL) was added. The mixture was extracted with EA (100mL×3), the combined organic phases were washed in turn with water (50mL×3) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give white solid 6-b (0.5g, yield 50%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 247 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 6-a
Under N2 atmosphere, ethyl 2-bromoisobutyrate (190mg, 1mmol) and potassium carbonate (138mg, 1mmol) were added to a solution of compound 6-b (75mg, 0.3mmol) in acetonitrile (4mL), the mixture was reacted for 3hrs at 80°C. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (8mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give yellow liquid 6-a (56 mg, yield 52%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 361 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 6
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 6-a (56mg, 0.156mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (2mL) and water (1mL), the mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aqueous solution (2mL) and water (1mL), solid was precipitated and filtered. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 6 (32mg, yield 62%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 333 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 13.27 (s, 1H), 9.24 (s, 1H), 8.39 (s, 1H), 8.16 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.02 (d, J=8.0Hz, 1H), 7.72 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.30 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.26 (s, 1H), 6.94 (s, 1H), 1.55 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 7
Compound 7A
Compound 7B
Synthesis of compound 7A-a and 7B-a
Under N2 atmosphere, ethyl 2-bromopropionate (540mg, 3mmol) and potassium carbonate (560mg, 4mmol) were added to a solution of compound 6-b (500mg, 2mmol) in acetonitrile (20mL), the mixture was reacted for 6hrs at 80 °C. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure, the residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (200mL). The filtrate was washed with water (50mL×3) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give yellow liquid, followed by separating with enantiomeric chromatographic column (process I, mobile phase: Hexane: EtOH: DEA =70:30:0.1) to give enantiomer 7A-a which is obtained firstly (80 mg, yield 11.5%; LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 347 [M+H]+) (Tr = 9.0 min) and enantiomer 7B-a which is obtained later (90 mg, yield 13%; LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 347 [M+H]+) (Tr = 11.0 min). The absolute configuration of 7A-a and 7B-a is unknown.
Synthesis of compound 7A
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 7A-a (70mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (2mL) and water (1mL), the mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aqueous solution (2mL) and water (2mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 7A (51mg, yield 80%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 319 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 13.15 (s, 1H), 9.24 (s, 1H), 8.40 (s, 1H), 8.19 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.01 (d, J=8.0Hz, 1H), 7.73 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.40 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.26 (s, 1H), 6.94 (s, 1H), 4.89 (m, 1H), 1.53 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Synthesis of compound 7B
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 7B-a (70mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (2mL) and water (1mL), the mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aqueous solution (2mL) and water (2mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 7B (46mg, yield 72%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 319 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 13.15 (s, 1H), 9.24 (s, 1H), 8.40 (s, 1H), 8.19 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.01 (d, J=8.0Hz, 1H), 7.73 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.40 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.26 (s, 1H), 6.94 (s, 1H), 4.89 (m, 1H), 1.53 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 8
2 {[4-(4-Cyano-2-fluorophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio} -2-methylpropionic acid (Compound 8)
Synthesis of compound 8-b
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 4-c (330mg, 1mmol), 2-fluoro-4-cyanophenylboronic acid (165mg, 1mmol) and sodium carbonate (212mg, 0.2mmol) were suspended in a mixed solution of dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (56mg, 0.1mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80 °C for 3hrs, cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (20mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 8-b (63mg, yield 19%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 387 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 8-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (12mg, 0.02mmol) and 4,5- bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (20mg, 0.02mmol) were added to a solution of compound 8-b (63mg, 0.2mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (30mg, 0.2mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (52mg, 0.4mmol) in dioxane (8mL), the mixture was reacted in a microwave at 110°C for 30mins. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, followed by evaporating dioxane under reduced pressure, the residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 8-a (72mg, yield 91.3%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 395 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 8
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 8-a (72mg, 0.18mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (2mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aqueous solution (2mL) and water (2mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 8 (16mg, yield 24%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 367 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.8 (s, 1H), 9.44 (s, 1H), 8.54 (s, 1H), 8.23 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 8.10 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.92 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.78 (t, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.70 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.59 (s, 1H), 1.44 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 9
2{[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)-8-fluoroisoquinolin-6-yl]thio}-2-methylpropionic acid (Compound 9)
Synthesis of compound 9-f
At 0°C, p-toluenesulfonyl chloride (4.00g, 21mmol) was added in portion to a solution of 5-bromo-2-fluorobenzlamine (4.08g, 20mmol) and triethylamine (4.04g, 40mmol) in DCM (60mL). The mixture was reacted at 0°C for 30mins, followed by removing the ice bath, further reacting at room temperature for 16hrs, then being concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give compound 9-f (5.30g, yield 74%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 358 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 9-e
At room temperature, 2-bromo-1,1-diethoxyethane (3.0g, 15mmol), cesium carbonate (6.5g, 20mmol) were added to a solution of compound 9-f (3.57g, 10mmol) in DMF (15mL). The mixture was reacted for 16hrs at 80°C, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by column chromatography (PE:EA = 8:1) to give compound 9-e (3.80g, 80%).
Synthesis of compound 9-d
At -5°C, compound 9-e (1.50mg, 3.18mmol) was added to a mixture of AlCl3 (2.0g, 15mmol) in DCM (20mL). The mixture was reacted for 16hrs at room temperature, followed by adding 2M HCl aqueous solution (20mL), extracted with DCM (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 7:1) to give compound 9-d (220mg, yield 31%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 226 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 9-c
Compound 9-d (200mg, 0.89mmol) and N-iodosuccinimide (300mg, 1.33mmol) were dissolved in acetic acid (10mL) and trifluoroacetic acid (2mL), the mixture was reacted for 6hrs at 80 °C. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 8:1) to give compound 9-c (200mg, yield 64%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 352 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 9-b
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 9-c (144mg, 0.4mmol), compound 3-c (111mg, 0.4mmol) and sodium carbonate (170mg, 1.6mmol) were suspended in ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (10mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (43mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was reacted for 4hrs at 50°C, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 9-b (100mg, yield 66%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 377 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 9-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (30mg, 0.033mmol) and 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine))-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (38mg, 0.066mmol) were added to a solution of compound 9-b (110mg, 0.29mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (64mg, 0.44mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (187mg, 1.45mmol) in dioxane (10mL). The mixture was reacted for 5hrs at 100°C, followed by cooling to room temperature, concentrating under reduced pressure to remove dioxane. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 4:1) to give compound 9-a (120mg, yield 93%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 445 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 9
At room temperature, 1M LiOH aqueous solution (2.0mL) was added to a mixed solution of compound 9-a (100mg, 0.22mmol) in methanol (8mL) and THF (8mL). The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 16hrs, followed by being concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved with water (10mL), adjusted to pH=3 with 1M citric acid aqueous solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 9 (70 mg, yield 76%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 417 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.79 (s, br., 1H), 9.61 (s, 1H), 8.68 (s, 1H), 8.35 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.28 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.86 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.75 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.60 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.51 (d, J=10.4 Hz, 1H), 7.42 (d, J=11.2 Hz, 1H), 7.07 (s, 1H), 1.29 (s, 3H), 1.22 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 10
2{[4-(5-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio}-2-methylpropionic acid (Compound 10)
Synthesis of compound 10-e
5-Bromo-1-naphthoic acid (980mg, 3.92mmol) was added to thionyl chloride (5mL). The mixture was stirred at 85°C for 2hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in anhydrous THF (10mL), the solution was added dropwise into 25%-28% aqueous ammonia (20mL) at 0°C. The mixture was warmed to room temperature and further stirred for 2hrs, followed by being extracted with EA (60mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give white solid 10-e (950mg, yield 97%). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 250 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 10-d
At 0°C, trifluoroacetic anhydride (3.2g, 15.1mmol) was added dropwise to a solution of compound 10-e (0.94g, 3.78mmol) and triethylamine (1.53g, 15.1mmol) in THF (8mL). The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature and further reacted for 3hrs, and then concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 10-d (0.85g, yield 97%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 232 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 10-c
Under N2 atmosphere, bis(pinacolato)diboron (1.32g, 5.2mmol), potassium acetate (1.0g, 10.38mmol) and [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (0.253 g, 0.346 mmol) were added respectively to a solution of compound 10-d (0.8g, 3.46mmol) in dioxane (15mL). The mixture was stirred at 80 °C for 6hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 10-c (0.85g, yield 88%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 280 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 10-b
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 10-c (200mg, 0.72mmol), compound 4-c (200mg, 0.6mmol) and sodium carbonate (130mg, 1.2mmol) were suspended in dioxane (20mL) and water (2mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (50mg, 0.06mmol) was added. The mixture was reacted for 2hrs at 80°C, cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (20mL), the filtrate was concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 10-b (50mg, yield 81%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 359 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 10-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (16mg, 0.015mmol) and 4,5-bis(bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (17mg, 0.03mmol) were added to a solution of compound 10-b (53mg, 0.15mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (28mg, 0.19mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (38mg, 0.29mmol) in dioxane (5mL). The mixture was reacted for 6hrs at 100°C, cooled to room temperature, followed by being concentrated under reduced pressure to remove dioxane. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 10-a (45mg, yield 71%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 427 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 10
At room temperature, 1M NaOH aqueous solution (2.5mL) was added to a solution of compound 10-a (59mg, 0.14mmol) in methanol (5mL), the mixture was stirred for 5hrs, followed by adding 1M HCl aqueous solution to adjust pH=6, being concentrated under reduced pressure to remove methanol, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 10 (43mg, yield 78%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 399 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.63 (s, 1H), 9.50 (s, 1H), 8.56 (s, 1H), 8.28 (m, 3H), 7.99 (m, 1H), 7.78 (d, J=6.3 Hz, 1H), 7.61 (m, 3H), 7.26 (s, 1H), 1.29 (s, 3H), 1.23 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 11
2-{[4-(8-Cyano-2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzodioxan-5-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio}-2-methylpr opionic acid (Compound 11)
Synthesis of compound 11-f
At room temperature, diphenyl phosphoryl azide (8.02g, 29mmol) and triethyl amine (4.2g, 42mmol) were added to a solution of 2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzodioxane-5-carboxylic acid (5.0g, 28mmol) in anhydrous THF (110mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding water (30mL), heating to 70 °C and further reacting for 3hrs, then cooling to room temperature, being extracted with EA (100mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give compound 11-f (1.58g, yield 37%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 152 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 11-e
At 0°C, a solution of N-bromosuccinimide (1.73g, 9.73mmol) in acetonitrile (5mL) was added to a solution of compound 11-f (1.4g, 9.27mmol) in acetonitrile (35mL). The mixture was warmed to room temperature and reacted for 3hrs, evaporated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1 to 5:1) to give compound 11-e (1.63g, yield 77%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 230 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 11-d
At 0°C, sodium nitrite (0.5g, 7.2mmol) was slowly added to a suspension of compound 11-e (1.5g, 6.55mmol) in 3M HCl aqueous solution (12mL), reacted for 30mins, sodium bicarbonate solid was added to adjust the reaction mixture to pH=7. The mixture was heated to 60°C, a solution of CuCN (0.7g, 7.86mmol) and KCN (1.06g, 16.37mmol) in water (20mL) was added dropwise, and further stirred for 30mins. The reaction solution was cooled to room temperature, extracted with DCM (60mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE: EA = 10:1) to give compound 11-d (1.2g, yield 77%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 240 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 11-c
At -78°C, a solution of 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (1.7mL, 4.2mmol) was added dropwise to a solution of compound 11-d (910mg, 3.8mmol) in anhydrous THF (20mL), the mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding trimethyl borate (594mg, 5.7mmol) to the reaction solution. The reaction solution was slowly warmed to room temperature, further stirred for 16hrs, saturated NaCl aq. solution (20mL) was added. Organic phase was seperated, the aqueous phase was extracted with EA (60mL×3). The combined organic phases were dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give yellow solid 11-c (700mg, yield 90%). The product was directly used for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 206 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 11-b
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 11-c (130mg, 0.63mmol), compound 4-c (200mg, 0.6mmol) and cesium carbonate (390mg, 1.2mmol) were suspended to a mixture of dioxane (10mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (43mg, 0.06mmol) was added. The mixture was reacted for 10hrs at 80°C, cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (20mL), the filtrate was concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 11-b (146mg, yield 66%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 367 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 11-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (36mg, 0.04mmol) and 4,5- bis(diphenylphosphine)9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (46mg, 0.08mmol) were added to a solution of compound 11-b (146mg, 0.52mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (77mg, 0.52mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (103mg, 0.8mmol) in dioxane (8mL). The mixture was stirred for 6hrs at 100°C, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove dioxane. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 1:2) to give compound 11-a (147mg, yield 85%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 435 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 11
At room temperature, 1M NaOH aq. solution (2.5mL) was added to a solution of compound 11-a (146mg, 0.34mmol) in methanol (5mL), the mixture was stirred for 5hrs. The mixture was adjusted to pH=6 with 1M HCl aq. solution, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove methanol, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 11 (95 mg, yield 69%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 407 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.79 (s, 1H), 9.36 (s, 1H), 8.56 (s, 1H), 8.42 (s, 1H), 8.17 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.63 (m, 2H), 7.46 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.04 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 4.47 (m, 2H), 4.23 (m, 2H), 1.47 (s, 3H), 1.44 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 12
2-{[4-(4-Cyano-7-fluoronaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio}-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 12)
Synthesis of compound 12-f
At room temperature, diphenyl phosphoryl azide (7.6g, 27.6mmol) and triethyl amine (4.0g, 54mmol) were added to a solution of 6-fluoronaphthalene-1-carboxylic acid (5.0g, 26.3mmol) in anhydrous THF (60mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding water (30mL), heating to 70°C and further stirring for 3hrs. The reaction solution was cooled to room temperature, extracted with EA (150mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA=15:1) to give compound 12-f (1.0g, yield 16%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 162 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 12-e
At 0°C, a solution of N-bromosuccinimide (1.55g, 8.7mmol) in DCM (5mL) was added dropwise to a solution of compound 12-f (1.4g, 8.7mmol) in DCM (50mL). The reaction solution was stirred for 30mins, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 15:1) to give compound 12-e (1.45g, yield 70%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 240 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 12-d
At 0 °C, sodium nitrite (0.5g, 7.2mmol) was slowly added to a suspension of compound 12-e (800mg, 3.3mmol) in 3M HCl aqueous solution (12mL), the mixture was reacted for 30mins, sodium bicarbonate solid was added to adjust the reaction solution to pH=7. At 60°C, the mixture was added to a solution of CuCN (357mg, 4.0mmol) and KCN (536mg, 8.25mmol) in water (20mL), the mixture was further reacted for 30mins. The reaction solution was cooled to room temperature, extracted with DCM (60mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give compound 12-d (420mg, yield 50%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 250 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 12-c
At -78 °C, a solution of 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (0.5mL, 1.17mmol) was added dropwise to a solution of compound 12-d (226mg, 0.9mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding trimethyl borate (142mg, 1.36mmol) dropwise, then slowly warming to room temperature, and further stirring for 16hrs, 1M HCl aqueous solution (5mL) was added. The organic phase was seperated, the aqueous phase was extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give yellow solid 12-c (200mg, yield 100%). The product was directly used for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 216 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 12-b
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 12-c (120mg, 0.93mmol), compound 4-c (223mg, 1.11mmol) and cesium carbonate (363mg, 1.11mmol) were suspended in a mixture of dioxane (8mL) and water (0.8mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (41mg, 0.056mmol) was added. The mixture was reacted for 5hrs at 80°C, cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (20mL). The filtrate was concentrated under reduced pressure, the residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 12-b (90mg, yield 43%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 377 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 12-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (22mg, 0.02mmol) and 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (28mg, 0.05mmol) were added to a solution of compound 12-b (90mg, 0.24mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (46mg, 0.3mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (62mg, 0.48mmol) in dioxane (8mL). The mixture was stirred for 6hrs at 100°C, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove dioxane. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 12-a (100mg, yield 94%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 445 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 12
At room temperature, 1M NaOH aq. solution (2.5mL) was added to a solution of compound 12-a (100mg, 0.22mmol) in methanol (5mL), the mixture was stirred for 10hrs. The mixture was adjusted to pH=6 with 1M HCl aq. solution, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove methanol, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 12 (70 mg, yield 75%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 417 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.69 (s, 1H), 9.51 (s, 1H), 8.68 (s, 1H), 8.47 (d, J=8.5 Hz, 1H), 8.29 (m, 2H), 8.12 (m, 1H), 7.83 (m, 2H), 7.73 (d, J=8.5 Hz, 1H), 7.61 (s, 1H), 1.41 (s, 3H), 1.40 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 13
3-[4-(4-Cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl]butyric acid (Compound 13)
Synthesis of compound 13-e
Under N2 atmosphere, bis(pinacolato)diboron (4.53g, 17.82mmol), potassium acetate (4.37g, 44.55mmol) and palladium acetate (0.17g, 0.74mmol) were added respectively to a solution of 1-bromo-4-nitrobenzene (3.0g, 14.85mmol) in DMF (10mL). The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 2hrs, followed by adding water (20mL) and EA (20mL), the organic phase was in turn washed with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 13-e (2g, yield 54%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 250 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 13-d
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 4-c (1.0g, 3mmol), compound 13-e (0.82g, 3.3mmol) and sodium carbonate (0.95g, 8.98mmol) were suspended in DMF (10mL) and water (5mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (0.245g, 0.3mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 2hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (15mL), being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phase was in turn washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 13-d (0.9g, yield 90%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 329 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 13-c
Under N2 atmosphere, methyl crotonate (0.29mL, 2.7mmol), palladium acetate (41mg, 0.18mmol), tri-o-methylphenylphosphine (111mg, 0.36mmol) and triethyl amine (0.5mL, 3.6mmol) were added to a solution of compound 13-d (600mg, 1.8mmol) in DMF (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs at 80°C, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (15mL) and being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phase was washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 13-c (360mg, yield 57%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 349 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 13-b
Under H2 atmosphere (1 atm.), Pd-C (100mg) was added to a solution of compound 13-c (180mg, 0.51mmol) in ethanol (20mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs at room temperature, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 13-b (360 mg, yield 57%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 321 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 13-a
At 0°C, sodium nitrite (14.2mg, 0.2mmol) was slowly added to a suspension of compound 13-b (60mg, 0.18mmol) in concentrated HCl aqueous solution (1mL), the mixture was stirred for 30mins, sodium bicarbonate solid was added to adjust the reaction solution to pH=7. The mixture was heated to 60°C, then was added to a solution of CuCN (20.1mg, 0.22mmol) and KCN (30.5mg, 0.46mmol) in water (3mL), further reacted for 30mins. The reaction solution was cooled to room temperature, extracted with DCM (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give compound 13-a (30mg, yield 48%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 331 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 13
At room temperature, LiOH (50mg, 2mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 13-a (30mg, 0.09mmol) in methanol (2mL), THF (2mL) and water (4mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, followed by being adjusted to pH=7 with 2M HCl aq. solution and then extracted with EA (10 mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 13 (10mg, yield 35%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 317 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.10 (s, 1H), 9.34 (s, 1H), 8.44 (s, 1H), 8.20 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 8.05 (d, J=8.0Hz, 2H), 7.77 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.74 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 2H), 7.62 (s, 1H), 3.30 (m, 1H), 2.57 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 2H), 1.26 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 14
(2E)-3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]acrylic acid (Compound 14)
Synthesis of compound 14-a
Under N2 atmosphere, methyl acrylate (0.189mL, 2.09mmol), palladium acetate (31.2mg, 0.14mmol), tri-o-methylphenylphosphine (85mg, 0.27mmol) and triethyl amine (0.39mL, 2.78mmol) were added to a solution of compound 5-b (500mg, 1.39mmol) in DMF (5mL). The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (15mL), being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 14-a (400mg, yield 79%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 379 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 14
At room temperature, LiOH (52.6mg, 2.19mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 14-a (80mg, 0.22mmol) in methanol (2mL), THF (2mL) and water (4mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, adjusted to pH=7 with 2M HCl aq. solution, extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 14 (68mg, yield 88%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 351 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.60 (s, 1H), 9.51 (s, 1H), 8.55 (s, 1H), 8.24 (m, 3H), 8.13 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.85 (t, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.75 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.51 (m, 4H), 6.61 (d, J=15.6 Hz, 1H) ppm.
Embodiment 15
3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]butyric acid (Compound 15)
Synthesis of compound 15-b
Under N2 atmosphere, methyl crotonate (72mg, 0.56mmol), palladium acetate (12.5mg, 0.05mmol), tri-o-methylphenylphosphine (34mg, 0.11mmol) and triethyl amine (0.15mL, 1.11mmol) were added to a solution of compound 5-b (200mg, 0.56mmol) in DMF (5mL). The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (10mL), being extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 15-b (120mg, yield 59%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 379 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 15-a
At 0°C, NaBH4 (120mg, 3.17mmol) was slowly added to a solution of compound 15-b (120mg, 0.31mmol) and NiCl2 (102mg, 0.79mmol) in methanol (150mL). The mixture was stirred at 0°C for 4.5hrs, warmed to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure, followed by adding water (20mL) to the residue, being extracted with EA (50mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (50mL×3) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 15-a (45mg, yield 37%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =381 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 15
At room temperature, LiOH (28.3mg, 1.18mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 15-a (45mg, 0.11mmol) in methanol (2mL), THF (2mL) and water (4mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, and then adjusted to pH=7 with 2M HCl aq. solution, extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 15 (18mg, yield 42%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 367 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.25 (s, 1H), 8.31 (s, 1H), 8.25 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 8.12 (d, J=4.4 Hz, 1H), 8.09 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.70 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.59 (m, 2H), 7.44 (m, 1H), 7.35 (t, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 7.04 (d, J=10 Hz, 1H), 3.12 (m, 1H), 2.36 (m, 1H), 1.07 (m,3H) ppm.
Embodiment 16
3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 16)
Synthesis of compound 16-b
At 0°C, NaBH4 (145mg, 3.84mmol) was slowly added to a solution of compound 14-a (350mg, 0.96mmol) and NiCl2 (62.2mg, 0.48mmol) in methanol (150mL). The mixture was stirred at 0°C for 4.5hrs, warmed to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure, followed by adding water (20mL) to the residue, being extracted with EA (50mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (50mL×3) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 16-b (200mg, yield 57%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =367 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 16-a
Under N2 atmosphere, at -78°C, a solution of 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (0.87mL, 2.18mmol) was added dropwise in a solution of diisopropylamine (0.11mL, 2.18mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 30mins, a solution of compound 16-b (200mg, 0.55mmol) in anhydrous THF (5mL) was added dropwise, and the mixture was further stirred for 30mins, a solution of CH3I (139.5mg, 0.98mmol) in anhydrous THF (5mL) was added dropwise, the mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature and further stirred for 2hrs, saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (10mL) was added, the mixture was extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 16-a (20mg, yield 19%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =381 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 16
At room temperature, LiOH (25mg, 1.05mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 16-a (20mg, 0.05mmol) in methanol (2mL), THF (2mL) and water (4mL).
The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, adjusted to pH=7 with 2M HCl aq. solution, extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 16 (10mg, yield 52%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 367 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.37 (s, 1H), 8.42 (d, J=2.4 Hz, 1H), 8.36 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 8.21 (m, 2H), 7.81 (t, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.69 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.66 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.50 (m, 2H), 7.13 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 2.97 (m, 1H), 2.65 (m, 2H), 1.02 (m,3H) ppm.
Embodiment 17
3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]-2,2-dimethyl propionic acid (Compound 17)
Synthesis of compound 17-a
Under N2 atmosphere, at -78°C, a solution of 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (0.87mL, 2.18mmol) was slowly added to a solution of diisopropylamine (0.11mL, 2.18mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL) dropwise. The mixture was stirred for 30mins, followed by adding a solution of compound 16-b (200mg, 0.55mmol) in anhydrous THF (5mL) dropwise, further stirred for 30mins, followed by adding a solution of CH3I (139.5mg, 0.98mmol) in anhydrous THF (5mL). The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature, further stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (10mL) and being extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 17-a (20mg, yield 18.5%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =395 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 17
At room temperature, LiOH (24mg, 1.01mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 17-a (20mg, 0.05mmol) in methanol (2mL), THF (2mL) and water (4mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding 2M HCl aq. solution to adjust pH=7, and then extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 17 (5mg, yield 26%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 381 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.37 (s, 1H), 8.42 (s, 1H), 8.37 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 8.21 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.81 (m, 1H), 7.55 (m, 5H), 7.11 (s, 1H), 2.97 (m, 1H), 2.89 (m, 2H), 1.02 (s, 3H), 0.97 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 18
2-{[8-(4-Cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-2-yl]thio}-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 18)
Synthesis of compound 18-b
8-Bromo-2-chloroquinazoline (110mg, 0.45mmol) was added to a suspension of ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (80mg, 0.54mmol), potassium carbonate (124mg, 0.9mmol) in DMF (3mL). The mixture was stirred for 3hrs at 130°C, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (20mL), being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 6:1) to give colorless oil 18-b (108mg, yield 67.5%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =355 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 18-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 18-b (108mg, 0.3mmol), 4-cyanophenyl boronic acid (54mg, 0.36mmol) and cesium carbonate (196mg, 0.6mmol) were suspended in dioxane (10mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (40mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 90°C for 16hrs, followed by cooling to room temperature, being concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give colorless oil 18-a (83mg, yield 72%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 378 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 18
At room temperature, 1M NaOH aq. solution (2.0mL) was added to a solution of compound 18-a (83mg, 0.22mmol) in methanol (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution to adjust pH=5-6. being extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by HPLC (mobile phase: 10mM NH4HCO3 aq. solution: acetonitrile = 25%-55%) to give yellow solid 18 (7mg, yield 9%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 350 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.31 (s, 1H), 8.07 (dd, J=8.0 Hz, 1.6 Hz, 1H), 7.98 (dd, J=7.6 Hz, 2.4 Hz, 1H), 7.84 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 2H), 7.77 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 2H), 7.71 (dd, J=7.8 Hz, 3.6 Hz, 1H), 1.68 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 19
{[4-(4-Cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl](methyl)carbamoyl}formic acid (Compound 19)
Synthesis of compound 19-g
Under CO atmosphere (10 atm.), a mixture of 6-bromoisoquinoline (5.0g, 24mmol), sodium acetate (2.56g, 31mmol), tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium (2.77g, 2.4mmol), palladium acetate (1.1g, 4.8mmol), DMF (50mL) and DCM (50mL) was heated to 100°C, stirred for 16hrs and then cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove methanol. Water (100mL) was added to the residue, EA (200mL×2) was used for extract. The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (100mL×3) and saturated brine (100mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give white solid 19-g (4.34g, yield 96%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =188 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 19-f
N-Bromosuccinimide (6.19g, 34.8mmol), compound 19-g (4.34g, 23.2mmol) and acetic acid (25mL) were added to 80°C and stirred for 16hrs, the mixture was cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. Saturated sodium bicarbonate solution was added to the residue (30mL), the mixture was extracted with EA (50mL×2). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give compound 19-f (3.59g, yield 58%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 268 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 19-e
At room temperature, 2M NaOH aq. solution (10mL) was added to a solution of compound 19-f (3.59g, 13.5mmol) in methanol (30mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution to adjust pH=5-6, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give yellow solid 19-e (3.29g, yield 96.8%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 254 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 19-d
At room temperature, diphenyl phosphoryl azide (5.2g, 25.2mmol) and triethyl amine (2.5g, 25.2mmol) were added to a solution of compound 19-e (3.17g, 12.6mmol) in anhydrous THF (30mL). The mixture was stirred for 3hrs, followed by adding water (lOmL), refluxing for 12hrs, then cooling to room temperature, being concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA= 1:1) to give yellow solid 19-g (0.2g, yield 7%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 225 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 19-c
Sodium methoxide (218mg, 4.03mmol) and polyformaldehyde (121mg, 4.03mmol) were added to a solution of compound 19-d (180mg, 0.81mmol) in methanol (6mL). The mixture was refluxed for 1.5hrs, cooled to 0°C, NaBH4 (185mg, 4.86mmol) was added in portions. The mixture was refluxed again for 1.5hrs, then cooled to room temperature, saturated NaHCO3 (30mL) was added, the mixture was extracted with DCM (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give yellow solid 19-c (175mg, yield 91.6%), the product was directly used for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 237 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 19-b
At room temperature, ethyl oxalyl monochloride (151mg, 1.11mmol) was added to a solution of compound 19-c (175mg, 0.74mmol) and triethyl amine (150mg, 1.48mmol) in DCM (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding water (lOmL), being extracted with DCM (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give yellow oil 19-b (249mg, yield 99%), the product was directly used for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 339 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 19-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 19-b (249mg, 0.74mmol), 4-cyanophenylboronic acid (163mg, 1.11mmol) and sodium carbonate (157mg, 1.48mmol) were suspended in dioxane (15mL) and water (2mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (54mg, 0.07mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 90°C for 12hrs, followed by cooling to room temperature, being concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1-1:1) to give compound 19-a (90 mg, yield 34%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 360 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 19
At room temperature, LiOH (2.0mL) was added to a solution of compound 19-a (90mg, 0.25mmol) in methanol (5mL), THF (3mL) and water (1mL). The reaction solution was stirred for 2hrs, and then concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was adjusted to pH=5-6 with 1M HCl aq. solution, then extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduce pressure. The residue underwent HPLC preparation (mobile phase: 10mM NH4HCO3 aq. solution: acetonitrile = 25%-55%) to give white solid 19 (5mg, yield 7%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 332 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.34 (s, 1H), 8.47 (s, 1H), 8.31 (d, J=8.6 Hz, 1H), 7.96 (d, J=8.6 Hz, 1H), 7.80 (m, 4H), 3.39 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 20
{[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl] (methyl)carbamoyl} formic acid (Compound 20)
Synthesis of compound 20
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 19-b (260mg, 0.77mmol), compound 3-c (258mg, 0.93mmol) and sodium carbonate (163mg, 1.54mmol) were suspended in dioxane (8mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (56mg, 0.07mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 90°C for 12hrs, followed by cooling to room temperature, being concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue underwent HPLC preparation (mobile phase: 10mM NH4HCO3 aq. solution: acetonitrile = 25%-45%) to give yellow solid 20 (40mg, yield 13.6%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 382 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.42 (s, 1H), 8.47 (s, 1H), 8.33 (d, J=8.7 Hz, 2H), 8.20 (d, J=7.3 Hz, 1H), 7.79 (dd, J=8.6 Hz, 4.8 Hz, 1H), 7.71 (d, J=7.3 Hz, 1H), 7.56 (m, 2H), 7.33 (d, J=1.4 Hz, 2H), 3.24 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 21
2-{[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio}propionic acid (Compound 21)
Synthesis of compound 21-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (24mg, 0.05mmol) and 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (30mg, 0.05mmol) were added to a solution of compound 5-b (185mg, 0.51mmol), ethyl 2-mercaptopropionate (83mg, 0.61mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (133mg, 1.03mmol) in dioxane (6mL). The mixture was reacted in a microwave at 110°C for 1h, cooled to room temperature, and then concentrated under reduced pressure to remove dioxane. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:2) to give yellow solid 21-a (163mg, yield 77%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 413 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 21
At room temperature, LiOH (12mg, 0.29mmol) was added to a solution of compound 21-a (30mg, 0.07mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution to adjust pH=5-6, the mixture was extracted with EA (15mL×2). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure to give white solid 21 (16mg, yield 57%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 385 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 9.43 (s, 1H), 8.50 (s, 1H), 8.27 (m, 3H), 7.85 (s, 1H), 7.72 (dd, J=11.7 Hz, 7.5 Hz, 2H), 7.59 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.45 (d, J=9.0 Hz, 1H), 7.15 (d, J=10.1 Hz, 1H), 1.35 (s, 1H), 1.24 (m, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 22
2-{[4-(3-Chloro-4-cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio}-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 22)
Synthesis of compound 22-c
Under N2 atmosphere, bis(pinacolato)diboron (391mg, 1.54mmol), potassium acetate (412mg, 4.2mmol) and [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (102mg, 0.14mmol) were respectively added to a solution of 2-chloro-4-bromobenzonitrile (300mg, 1.4mmol) in dioxane (15mL). The mixture was stirred at 115°C for 12hrs, cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was evaporated under reduced pressure to give compound 22-c (620mg, yield 100%). The product was directly used for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 182 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 22-b
Compound 4-c (80mg, 0.24mmol) was added to a suspension of ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (71mg, 0.48mmol) and potassium carbonate (100mg, 0.72mmol) in DMF (2mL). The mixture was stirred at 130°C for 2hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (20mL), being extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica preparative plate (PE:EA = 3:1) to give yellow oil 22-b (75mg, yield 78%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 402 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 22-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 22-b (60mg, 0.15mmol), compound 22-c (120mg, 0.23mmol) and cesium carbonate (98mg, 0.3mmol) were suspended in dioxane (3mL) and water (0.3mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (11mg, 0.02mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 100°C for 12hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (lOmL), being extracted with EA (10mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica preparative plate (DCM: methanol = 20:1) to give brown solid 22-a (43mg, yield 70%).
Synthesis of compound 22
At room temperature, 1M NaOH aq. solution (1mL) was added to a solution of compound 22-a (43mg, 0.1mmol) in methanol (1mL) and THF (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 4hrs, followed by evaporating under reduced pressure to remove methanol. The residue was adjusted to pH=5-6 with 1M HCl aq. solution, followed by being extracted with DCM (10mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate (DCM: methanol = 10:1) to give yellow solid 22 (21mg, yield 53%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 383 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CDCl3) δ: 9.21 (s, 1H), 8.38 (s, 1H), 7.98 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.95 (s, 2H), 7.78 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 7.73 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.63 (s, 1H), 7.50 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 1.61 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 23
2-{[4-(2-Chloro-4-cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio}-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 23)
Synthesis of compound 23-b
Under N2 atmosphere, bis(pinacolato)diboron (391mg, 1.54mmol), potassium acetate (412mg, 4.5mmol) and [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (102mg, 0.14mmol) were respectively added to a solution of 2-chloro-4-bromobenzonitrile (300mg, 1.4mmol) in dioxane (15mL). The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 12hrs, cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was evaporated under reduced pressure, and the residue was purified by silica preparative plate to give white solid 23-b (73mg, yield 20%).1H-NMR (400MHz, CDCl3) δ: 7.78 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.62 (d, J=1.2 Hz, 1H), 7.52 (dd, J=7.6 Hz, 1.2 Hz, 1H), 1.37 (s, 12H) ppm.
Synthesis of compound 23-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 22-b (100mg, 0.15mmol), compound 23-b (73mg, 0.27mmol) and cesium carbonate (163mg, 0.5mmol) were suspended in dioxane (3mL) and water (0.3mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (19mg, 0.03mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 100□ for 12hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (10mL), being extracted with EA (10mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate (DCM: methanol = 20:1) to give white solid 23-a (72mg, yield 71%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 411 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 23
At room temperature, 1M NaOH aq. solution (1mL) was added to a solution of compound 23-a (72mg, 0.18mmol) in methanol (1mL) and THF (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, followed by evaporating under reduced pressure to remove methanol. The residue was adjusted to pH=5-6 with 1M HCl aq. solution, followed by being extracted with DCM (10mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica preparative plate (DCM: methanol = 10:1) to give white solid 23 (31mg, yield 46%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 383 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 9.42 (s, 1H), 8.44 (s, 1H), 8.31 (d, J=1.6 Hz, 1H), 8.21 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 8.03 (dd, J=8.0 Hz, 1.2 Hz, 1H), 7.73 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.39 (s, 1H), 1.42 (s, 3H), 1.41 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 24
1-{[4-(4-cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]thio} cyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid (Compound 24)
Synthesis of compound 24-a
Na2S•9H2O (182mg, 0.75mmol) was added to a solution of compound 5-b (180mg, 0.5mmol) in DMF (2mL). The mixture was reacted in a microwave at 130□ for 1h, cooled to room temperature, 1-bromo-cyclobutanoic acid ethyl ester (155mg, 0.75mmol) was added, the mixture was stirred at 50□ for 2hrs. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, followed by adding ice water (20mL), being extracted with EA (50mL). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate (PE:EA = 1:1) to give white solid 24-a (89 mg, yield 40%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 439 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 24
At room temperature, LiOH•H2O (26mg, 0.61mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 24-a (89mg, 0.20mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (1mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 4hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure, followed by adding water (10mL) and EA (20mL). The aqueous phase was adjusted to pH=5-6 with 0.5M HCl aq. solution, solid turned out, the mixture was further stirred for 30mins and filtered. The solid was washed with water (lOmL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 24 (65 mg, yield 78%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 411 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.69 (s, 1H), 9.41 (s, 1H), 8.52 (s, 1H), 8.33 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.31 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.19 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.83 (m, 1H), 7.69 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.57 (m, 1H), 7.51 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.39 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 2.51 (m, 1H), 2.01 (m, 3H), 1.71 (m, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 25
3-{3-[(2, 6-dichlorophenyl)methyl]-1-methylimidazole[1,5-a]pyridine-6-yl}propionic acid (Compound 25)
Synthesis of compound 25-e
At 0□, a solution of 3M methyl magnesium bromide in THF (2.09mL, 6.28mmol) was added into a solution of 5-bromo-2-cyanopyridine (1.0g, 5.46mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was warmed to room temperature slowly, further stirred for 30mins, and followed by adding methanol (20mL), adding NaBH4 (410mg, 10.93mmol) in portions. The mixture was further stirred for 10hrs, followed by adding water (10mL) and 2M NaOH aq. solution (10mL) in turn, being extracted with EA (50mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate (PE:EA = 1:1) to give white solid 25-e (1.0g, yield 91%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 201 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 25-d
At room temperature, oxalyl chloride (0.69g, 5.47mmol) and DMF (0.1mL) were added to a solution of 2,6-dichlorophenylacetic acid (1.02g, 4.97mmol) in DCM (10mL), the mixture was stirred for 2hrs and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in DCM (10mL) again, at 0°C, the above solution was slowly added to a solution of compound 25-e (1.0g, 4.97mmol) and triethyl amine (1.39mL, 9.95mmol) in DCM (10mL). The mixture was warmed to room temperature and further stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding water (20mL), and being extracted with DCM (50mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified (PE:EA = 5:1) to give light yellow solid 25-d (0.9g, yield 46%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 387 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 25-c
Under N2 atmosphere, methyl acrylate (0.186mL, 2.06mmol), palladium acetate (23.1mg, 0.1mmol), tris(o-methylphenyl)phosphine (62.7mg, 0.2mmol) and triethyl amine (0.28mL, 2mmol) were added to a solution of compound 25-d (400mg, 1.03mmol) in DMF (5mL). The mixture was reacted in a microwave at 120°C for 10mins, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (15mL), being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phase was washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 25-c (400mg, yield 98%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 393 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 25-b
Under H2 atmosphere (1 atm.), the Pd-C (50mg) was added to a solution of compound 25-c (400mg, 1.02mmol) in ethanol (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 12hrs, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 25-b (350mg, yield 87%). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 393 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 25-a
Compound 25-b (350mg, 0.89mmol) was dissolved in phosphorus oxychloride (8mL), stirred at 110□ for 5hrs. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, added to ice water (20mL), followed by adding sodium carbonate solid to adjust pH=8, and then extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were in turn washed with water (20mL) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give yellow oil 25-a (150mg, yield 45%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 377 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 25
At room temperature, 20% NaOH aq. solution (2mL) was added to a solution of compound 25-a (120mg, 0.32mmol) in methanol (2mL). The reaction solution was stirred for 2hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove methanol, 6M HCl aq. solution was added to adjust pH=7, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 25 (65mg, yield 56%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 363 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 7.91 (s, 1H), 7.30-7.46 (m, 4H), 6.67 (d, J=9.6 Hz, 1H), 4.60 (s, 2H), 2.89 (t, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 2.67 (t, J=7.6 Hz, 2H), 2.38 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 26
2-({1-[(2,6-dichlorophenyl)methyl]-3-methyl-1H-indazol-6-yl}thio)-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 26)
Synthesis of compound 26-b
At room temperature, potassium carbonate (490mg, 3.55mmol) was added to a solution of 6-bromo-3-methyl-1H-indazole (500mg, 2.37mmol) and 2,6-dichlorobenzyl bromide (680mg, 2.84mmol) in DMF (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 12hrs, followed by adding water (lOmL), being extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give yellow oil 26-b (400mg, yield 45%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 369 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 26-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (25.5mg, 0.02mmol), 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (31mg, 0.05mmol) and CuI (5.1mg, 0.02mmol) were added to a solution of compound 26-b (100mg, 0.27mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (0.04mL, 0.27mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (0.14mL, 0.81mmol) in dioxane (2mL). The mixture was reacted in a microwave at 125°C for 1h, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove dioxane. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 26-a (80mg, yield 67%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 437 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 26
At room temperature, NaOH (72mg, 1.8mmol) was added to a mixed solution of compound 26-a (80mg, 0.18mmol) in methanol (2mL), THF (2mL) and water (2mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, adjusted to pH=7 by 2M HCl aq. solution, extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were washed in turn with water (10mL) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 26 (20mg, yield 27%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 409 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 7.60 (s, 1H), 7.52 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.34 (m, 2H), 7.24 (m, 1H), 7.13 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 5.64 (s, 1H), 2.37 (s, 3H), 1.35 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 27
2- {[5-(4-Cyanophenyl)imidazo[1,2-a]pyridin-6-yl]thio}-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 27)
Synthesis of compound 27-d
Under N2 atmosphere, 2-amino-6-bromopyridine (500mg, 2.89mmol), 4-cyanophenylboronic acid (510mg, 3.47mmol) and sodium carbonate (920mg, 8.67mmol) were suspended in DMF (10mL) and water (5mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (240mg, 0.29mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 2hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (15mL), being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phase was washed in turn with water (20mL) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA=2:1) to give compound 27-d (400mg, yield 71%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 196 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 27-c
At 0°C, N-bromosuccinimide (360mg, 2.05mmol) was added to a solution of compound 27-d (400mg, 2.05mmol) and ammonium acetate (160mg, 2.05mmol) in CH3CN (10mL). The reaction solution was warmed to room temperature and stirred for 12hrs, and concentrated under reduced pressure to remove solvent. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA=2:1) to give compound 27-c (500mg, yield 89%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 274 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 27-b
A solution of sodium acetate (42mg, 0.78mmol) and 2-bromo-1,1-diethoxyethane (0.28mL, 1.8mmol) in conc. HCl aqueous solution (0.1mL) and water (0.6mL) was heated to 110°C and refluxed for 10mins. The reaction solution was cooled to 60°C, the solution was added to a solution of compound 27-b (250mg, 0.91mmol) and sodium acetate (83mg, 1.55mmol) in 60% ethanol aqueous solution (10mL). The mixture was heated to 100°C and refluxed for 2.5hrs, cooled to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was added to ice water (5mL), adjusted to pH=7 with saturated sodium bicarbonate solution, extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phase was washed in turn with water (20mL) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 27-b (150mg, yield 55%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 298 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 27-a
Na2S • 9H2O (182mg, 0.75mmol) was added to a solution of compound 27-b (180mg, 0.5mmol) in N-methyl pyrrolidone (2mL). The reaction solution was reacted in a microwave at 150°C for 1h, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding ethyl 2-bromo-2-methylpropionate (100mg, 0.67mmol) and potassium carbonate (90mg, 0.67mmol). The mixture was stirred at 50 for 2hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding water (5mL), being extracted with EA (10mL). The organic phase was washed in turn with water (10mL) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 27-a (10mg, yield 8%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 366 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 27
At room temperature, LiOH (13.1mg, 0.55mmol) was added to a solution of compound 27-a (10mg, 0.02mmol) in methanol (2mL), THF (2mL) and water (4mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, adjusted to pH=7 with 2M HCl aq. solution, extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phase was in turn washed with water (10mL) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 27 (5mg, yield 54%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 338 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 7.97 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.59-7.70 (m, 5H), 7.26 (s, 1H), 1.38 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 28
2-{[3-(4-Cyanophenyl)-[1,2,4]triazo[4,3-a]pyridin-6-yl]thio}-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 28)
Synthesis of compound 28-c
At room temperature, a mixture of 2-hydrazino-5-bromopyridine (1.0g, 5.3mmol), 4-cyanobenzoyl chloride (0.97g, 5.85mmol), triethyl amine (0.64g, 0.88mmol) and DCM (15mL) was stirred for 12hrs, and filtered. The solid was washed with DCM (5mL), dried under vacuum to give yellow solid 28-c (1.13g, yield 67%). The produce was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 319 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 28-b
Compound 28-c (1.03g, 3.25mmol) was added to POCl3 (10mL). The mixture was stirred at 100°C for 12hrs, cooled to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure. Saturated NaHCO3 aq. solution was added to the residue to adjust pH=7, the mixture was extracted with EA (50mL×2). The organic phase was in turn washed with water (30mL) and saturated NaHCO3 aq. solution (30mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 28-b (0.85g, yield 80%). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 301 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 28-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (54mg , 0.05mmol) and 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (68mg, 0.11mmol) were added to a solution of compound 28-b (350mg, 1.17mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (208mg, 1.4mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (302mg, 2.34mmol) in dioxane (10mL). The mixture was reacted in a microwave at 110°C for 1h, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove dioxane. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1-1:1) to give compound 28-a (268mg, yield 55%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 367 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 28
At room temperature, LiOH (51mg, 1.22mmol) was added to a solution of compound 28-a (223mg, 0.61mmol) in methanol (2mL), THF (6mL) and water (2mL). The mixture was stirred for 3hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure, followed by adding water (lOmL), being extracted with EA (30mL×2), the aqueous phase was adjusted to pH=5-6 with 2M HCl aq. solution and extracted with EA (30mL×2). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was recrystallized in EA (15mL) and PE (10mL) to give yellow solid 28 (108mg, yield 52%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 339 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.92 (s, 1H), 8.56 (s, 1H), 8.12 (m, 4H), 7.92 (d, J=9.8 Hz, 1H), 7.45 (d, J=9.4 Hz, 1H), 1.44 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 29
7-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridin-2-formic acid (Compound 29)
Synthesis of compound 29-c
Under N2 atmosphere, at -78°C, a solution of 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (24mL, 60mmol) was slowly added to a solution of diisopropylamine (6.1g, 60mmol) in anhydrous THF (100mL). The mixture was stirred for 15mins, followed by adding a solution of 3-bromo-4-chloropyridine (9.6g, 50mmol) in anhydrous THF (100mL), further stirred for 1h, followed by adding anhydrous DMF (10mL) and stirred for 30mins. The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (300mL), the mixture was extracted with EA (300mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (100mL) and saturated brine (100mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1-1:1) to give light yellow solid 29-c (5.9g, yield 54%).1H-NMR (400MHz, CDCl3) δ: 10.44 (s, 1H), 8.80 (s, 1H), 7.67 (s, 1H) ppm.
Synthesis of compound 29-b
Ethyl mercaptoacetate (2.4g, 20mmol) and potassium carbonate (3.0g, 24mmol) were added to a solution of compound 29-c (4.4g, 20mmol) in DMF (40mL). The mixture was heated to 45°C and stirred for 12hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding ice water (200mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (100mL×3) and dried under vacuum to give white solid 29-b (5.1g, yield 89.5%). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 286 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 29-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 29-b (285mg, 1mmol), compound 3-c (279mg, 1mmol) and sodium carbonate (212mg, 2mmol) were suspended in dioxane (6mL) and water (2mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (73mg, 0.1mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, cooled to room temperature and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 29-a (190mg, yield 53%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 359 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 29
At room temperature, LiOH (41mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 29-a (190mg, 0.53mmol) in methanol (3mL), THF (3mL) and water (3mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, adjusted to pH=5-6 with 2M HCl aq. solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give light yellow solid 29 (130mg, yield 74%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 331 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 9.42 (s, 1H), 8.64 (s, 1H), 8.40 (s, 1H), 8.35 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.29 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.90 (m, 2H), 7.66 (s, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 30
3-[7-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridin-2-yl]propionic acid (Compound 30)
Synthesis of compound 30-d
At -78°C, a solution of 1.0M diisobutylaluminum hydride in DCM (58mL, 58mmol) was slowly added to a solution of compound 29-b (5.7g, 20mmol) in DCM (50mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, warmed to room temperature, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (300mL). The organic phase was seperated, the aqueous phase was extracted with DCM (50mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (50mL) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give light yellow solid 30-d (4g, yield 83%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 242 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 30-c
At 0°C, triethyl phosphonoacetate (2.82mL, 10mmol) and sodium hydride (0.48g, 12mmol) were respectively added to a solution of compound 30-d (2.42g, 10mmol) in THF (50mL). The mixture was further stirred for 1h, warmed to room temperature, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (300mL), the mixture was extracted with EA (50mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (30mL×3) and saturated brine (30mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give light yellow solid 30-c (2g, yield 64%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =312 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 30-b
At 0°C, NaBH4 (0.25g, 6.4mmol) was slowly added to a solution of compound 30-c (2.0g, 6.4mmol) and NiCl (0.82g, 6.4mmol) in methanol (50mL). The mixture was stirred for 3hrs, warmed to room temperature, followed by adding NH4Cl aq. solution (300mL), the mixture was extracted with EA (100mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (50mL×3) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 4:1) to give light yellow solid 30-b (1.6g, yield 80%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =314 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 30-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 30-b (155mg, 0.5mmol), compound 3-c (140mg, 0.5mmol) and sodium carbonate (106mg, 1mmol) were suspended in dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (40mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, cooled to room temperature and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (30mL). The filtrate was washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 30-b (120mg, yield 62%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 387 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 30
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 30-a (120mg, 0.31mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, adjusted to pH=5-6 by 2M HCl aq. solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 30 (93mg, yield 84%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 359 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 9.15 (s, 1H), 8.42 (s, 1H), 8.32 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.90 (m, 1H), 7.81 (m, 1H), 7.68 (m, 2H), 3.10 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 3.07 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 31
2-[7-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridin-2-yl]acetic acid (Compound 31)
Synthesis of compound 31-b
NaOH (40mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of methyl(methylthiomethyl)sulfoxide (18mg, 1.5mmol) and compound 30-d (240mg, 1mmol) in THF (6mL). The mixture was heated to 80°C and stirred for 4hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. The residue was added to a solution of 2M HCl in methanol (10mL), refluxed for 1h, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was added to saturated NaHCO3 aq. solution (10mL), extracted with EA (10mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 4:1) to give compound 31-b (0.15g, yield 88%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =285 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 31-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 31-b (87mg, 0.3mmol), compound 3-c (84mg, 0.3mmol) and sodium carbonate (60mg, 0.6mmol) were suspended in dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (25mg, 0.03mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, cooled to room temperature and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (30mL). The filtrate was washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (lOmL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 31-a (76mg, yield 71%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 359 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 31
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 31-a (120mg, 0.31mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aq. solution to adjust pH=5-6, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 31 (44mg, yield 64%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 345 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 9.30 (s, 1H), 8.55 (s, 1H), 8.36 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 8.29 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.90 (m, 2H), 7.72 (m, 3H), 4.04 (s, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 32
2-[7-(4-Cyanophenyl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridin-2-yl]acetic acid (Compound 32)
Synthesis of compound 32-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 31-b (140mg, 0.5mmol), 4-cyanophenyl boronic acid (75mg, 0.5mmol) and sodium carbonate (60mg, 0.6mmol) were suspended in dioxane (4mL) and water (10mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (25mg, 0.03mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, cooled to room temperature and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (30mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 32-b (86mg, yield 56%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 309 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 32
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 32-a (86mg, 0.28mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aq. solution (2mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (10mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 32 (28mg, yield 34%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 295 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.87 (s, 1H), 9.11 (s, 1H), 8.64 (s, 1H), 8.06 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.91 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.57 (s, 1H), 4.06 (s, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 33
3-[7-(4-Cyanophenyl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridin-2-yl]-2,2-dimethylpropionic acid (Compound 33)
Synthesis of compound 33-b
Under N2 atmosphere, at -78°C, a solution of 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (2.0mL, 5mmol) was slowly added to a solution of diisopropylamine (505mg, 5mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 15mins, added dropwise to a solution of compound 30-b (630mg, 2mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL), stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding CH3I (720mg, 5mmol) and the mixture was further stirred for 3hrs. The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature, then added to saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (30mL), extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1-1:1) to give light yellow liquid 33-b (310mg, yield 45%).
Synthesis of compound 33-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 33-b (310mg, 0.91mmol), 4-cyanophenyl boronic acid (140mg, 0.91mmol) and sodium carbonate (212mg, 2mmol) were suspended in dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (40mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, and then cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. The residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (30mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give yellow liquid 33-a (76mg, yield 23%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 365 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 33
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 33-a (73mg, 0.19mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aq. solution (2mL) and water (1mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 33 (39mg, yield 61%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 337 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.34 (s, 1H), 8.64 (s, 1H), 8.02 (s, 4H), 7.71 (s, 1H), 7.57 (s, 1H), 3.34 (s, 2H), 1.26 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 34
3-[7-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridin-2-yl]-2,2-dimethylpropionic acid (Compound 34)
Synthesis of compound 34-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 33-b (230mg, 0.7mmol), compound 3-c (280mg, 0.5mmol) and sodium carbonate (150mg, 1.4mmol) were suspended in dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (40mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, cooled to room temperature and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (30mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was prepared by HPLC (mobile phase: 10mM NH4HCO3 aq. solution: acetonitrile =35%-45%) to give compound 34-a (53mg, yield 18%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 401 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 34
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 34-a (41mg, 0.1mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl aq. solution (2mL) and water (1mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 34 (16mg, yield 41%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 387 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.41 (s, 1H), 9.19 (s, 1H), 8.43 (s, 1H), 8.32 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=7.6 Hz, 1H), 7.88 (m, 2H), 7.65 (m, 2H), 7.47 (s, 1H), 3.14 (s, 2H), 1.12 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 35
3- {7-[(2,6-Dichlorophenyl)methyl]-1-benzothiophene-2-yl}propionic acid (Compound 35)
Synthesis of compound 35-b
At 0°C, triethyl amine (3.6mL) was slowly added to a mixture of n-butanol (10mL) and formic acid (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 10mins, followed by adding 7-bromo-1-benzothiophene-2-carbaldehyde (241mg, 1mmol) and 2,2-dimethyl-1,3-dioxane-4,6-dione (216mg, 1.5mmol). The mixture was heated to reflux for 8hrs, cooled to room temperature and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 15:1) to give compound 35-b (200mg, yield 59%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 341 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 35-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (54mg, 0.05mmol) and 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (94mg, 0.02mmol) and a solution of 0.4M 2,6-dichlorobenzyl zinc bromide in THF solution (2.5mL, 1mmol) were added to a solution of compound 35-b (170mg, 0.5mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was reacted at 60°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 35-a (170mg, yield 80%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 421 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 35
At room temperature, 1.0M NaOH aq. solution (3mL) was added to a solution of compound 35-a (84mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (4mL) and THF (8mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was adjusted to pH=3 with 1M HCl aq. solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 35 (60mg, yield 82%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 365 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.35 (s, br. 1H), 7.61 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.58 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.42 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.25 (s, 1H), 7.21 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 6.47 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 4.35 (s, 2H), 3.16 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 2H), 2.71 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 36
3- {4-[(2,6-Dichlorophenyl)methyl]-l-benzothiophene-2-yl}propionic acid (Compound 36)
Synthesis of compound 36-b
At 0°C, triethyl amine (3.6mL) was slowly added to a mixture of n-butanol (10mL) and formic acid (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 10mins, followed by adding 4-bromo-1-benzothiophene-2-carbaldehyde (241mg, 1mmol) and 2,2-dimethyl-1,3-dioxane-4,6-dione (216mg, 1.5mmol). The mixture was heated to reflux for 8hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 15:1) to give compound 36-b (221mg, yield 65%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 341 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 36-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (47mg, 0.05mmol) and 2-dicyclohexylphospho-2',6'-diisopropoxy-1,1'-biphenyl (94mg, 0.02mmol) and a solution of 0.4M 2,6-dichlorobenzyl zinc bromide in THF solution (2.5mL, 1mmol) were added to a solution of compound 36-b (170mg, 0.5mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was reacted at 60°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 36-a (180mg, yield 86%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 421 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 36
At room temperature, a solution of 1.0M NaOH aq. solution (3mL) was added to a solution of compound 36-a (84mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (4mL) and THF (8mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was adjusted to pH=3 with 1M HCl aq. solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 36 (70mg, yield 95%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 365 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.30 (s, br. 1H), 7.73 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.57 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.51 (s, 1H), 7.41 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.13 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 6.41 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 4.54 (s, 2H), 3.18 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 2H), 2.72 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 37
3-[4-[(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[2,3-c]pyridine-2-yl]propionic acid (Compound 37)
Synthesis of compound 37-e
Ethyl mercaptoacetate (1.81g, 15.1mmol) and cesium carbonate (6.0g, 18.6mmol) were added to a solution of 3,5-dibromo-4-pyridinecarboxaldehyde (4.0g, 15.1mmol) in THF (100mL). The mixture was stirred at 60 °C for 3hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 15:1) to give compound 37-e (3.7g, yield 85%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 286 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 37-d
At 0°C, NaBH4 (530mg, 13.9mmol) was added into a solution of compound 37-e (1.0g, 3.48mmol), LiCl (590mg, 13.9mmol) in THF (40mL) and methanol (20mL). The mixture was warmed to room temperature and stirred for 4hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. Water (40mL) and DCM (40mL) were added to the residue, the organic phase was seperated, aqueous phase was extracted with DCM (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 37-d (750mg, yield 89%). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 244 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 37-c
At 0 °C , (1,1,1-triacetoxy)-1,1-dihydro-1,2-benzoiodooxol-3(1H)-one (1.39g, 3.27mmol) was added to a solution of compound 37-d (750mg, 2.18mmol) in DCM (30mL). The reaction solution was warmed to room temperature and further stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding saturated sodium bicarbonate aq. solution (10mL) and saturated sodium thiosulfate aq. solution (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 10mins, organic phase was seperated. The organic phase was in turn washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (20mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 37-c (680mg, yield 91%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 342 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 37-b
At 0°C, triethyl amine (3.6mL) was slowly added to a mixture of n-butanol (10mL) and formic acid (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 10mins, followed by adding compound 37-c (300mg, 1.24mmol) and 2,2-dimethyl-1,3-dioxane-4,6-dione (300mg, 2.08mmol), refluxing for 8hrs. The mixture was cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 12:1) to give compound 37-b (280mg, yield 66%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 342 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 37-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 37-b (120mg, 0.35mmol), compound 3-c (110mg, 0.39mmol) and sodium carbonate (150mg, 1.4mmol) were suspended in ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (10mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (40mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 75°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 8:1) to give compound 37-a (90mg, yield 62%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 415 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 37
At room temperature, a solution of 1.0M LiOH aq. solution (2mL) was added to a solution of compound 37-a (100mg, 0.25mmol) in methanol (10mL) and THF (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in water (10mL), adjusted to pH=3 with 1M citric acid aq. solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 37 (50 mg, yield 55%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 359 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.30 (s, br. 1H), 9.30 (s, 1H), 8.44 (s, 1H), 8.32 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.26 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.87 (t, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 7.73 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.68 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.57 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 6.74 (s, 1H), 3.10 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 2H), 2.59 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 2H) ppm.
Embodiment 38
3 - [4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)-1-benzothiophen-2-yl] -2,2-dimethyl propionic acid (Compound 38)
Synthesis of compound 38-c
At -78°C, a solution of 1M lithium diisopropylamide in THF (3mL, 3mmol) was added slowly to a solution of methyl isobutyrate (714mg, 7.1mmol) in anhydrous THF (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 4-bromo-1-benzothiophene-2-carbaldehyde (500mg, 2.38mmol). The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature, followed by adding NH4Cl aq. solution (20mL), being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 38-c (700mg, yield 86%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 365 [M+Na]+.
Synthesis of compound 38-b
At 0°C, trifluoroacetic acid (2mL) was added to a solution of compound 38-c (170mg, 0.5mmol) and triethylsilane (392mg, 4mmol) in DCM (10mL). The mixture was warmed to room temperature and further stirred for 16hrs, and then concentrated under reduced pressure. DCM (30mL) was added to the residue. The mixture was in turn washed with saturated sodium bicarbonate solution (10mL) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 38-b (150mg, yield 92%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 349 [M+Na]+.
Synthesis of compound 38-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 38-b (150mg, 0.46mmol), compound 3-c (150mg, 0.54mmol) and sodium carbonate (300mg, 2.8mmol) were suspended in ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (12mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (50mg, 0.06mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 75°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by column chromatography (PE:EA = 4:1) to give compound 38-a (105mg, yield 57%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 400 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 38
At room temperature, 1.0M LiOH aq. solution (2.5mL) was added to a solution of compound 38-a (100mg, 0.25mmol) in methanol (10mL) and THF (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. Water (10mL) was added to the residue. The mixture was adjusted to pH=3 with 1M citric acid aq. solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 37 (80 mg, yield 83%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 408 [M+Na]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.37 (s, br. 1H), 8.29 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.24 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.06 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.85 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.67 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.58 -7.62 (m, 2H), 7.49 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 2H), 7.36 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 2.99 (s, 2H), 1.06 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 39
3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)-1-benzothiophen-2-yl]-2,2-difluoro-3-hydroxyl propionic acid (Compound 39)
Synthesis of compound 39-a
Under N2 atmosphere, Zn powder (130mg, 2mmol) was added to a solution of 4-bromo-1-benzothiophene-2-carbaldehyde (500mg, 2.38mmol) and ethyl difluorobromoacetate (808mg, 4mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was heated to 45□ and further stirred for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (20mL), being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 39-a (253mg, yield 71%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 388 [M+Na]+.
Synthesis of compound 39
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 39-a (190mg, 0.5mmol), compound 3-c (140mg, 0.5mmol) and sodium carbonate (106mg, 1mmol) were suspended in ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (20mL) and water (2mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene] palladium dichloride (50mg, 0.06mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 75□ for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. Water (20mL) was added to the residue, the mixture was extracted with EA (30mL×3). The aqueous phase was adjusted to pH=3 with 1M HCl aqueous solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 39 (120mg, yield 58%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 432 [M+Na]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 8.30 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 8.25 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.14 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.85 (t, J=7.0 Hz, 1H), 7.65-7.68 (m, 1H), 7.60 -7.63 (m, 1H), 7.55 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.39-7.42 (m, 1H), 6.82 (d, J=16.8 Hz, 1H), 5.23-5.30 (m, 1H) ppm.
Embodiment 40
3-{4-[(2,6-Dichlorophenyl)methyl]-1-benzothiophen-2-yl]-2,2-dimethyl propionic acid (Compound 40)
Synthesis of compound 40-a
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (47mg, 0.05mmol) and 2-dicyclohexylphospho-2',6'-diisopropoxy-1,1'-biphenyl (94mg, 0.02mmol) and a solution of 0.4M 2,6-dichlorobenzyl zinc bromide in THF solution (2.5mL, 1mmol) were added to a solution of compound 38-b (130mg, 0.4mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was reacted at 60°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 8:1) to give compound 40-a (150mg, yield 72%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 407 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 40
At room temperature, 1.0M NaOH aq. solution (1mL) was added to a solution of compound 40-a (84mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (5mL) and THF (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. Water (10mL) was added to the residue, 1M HCl aq. solution was added to adjust pH=3, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 40 (40mg, yield 50%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 393 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.49 (s, br. 1H), 7.73(d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.56 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.45 (s, 1H), 7.41 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 6.45 (d, J=10.4 Hz, 1H), 4.54 (s, 2H), 3.16 (s, 3H), 1.20 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 41
3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[2,3-c]pyridin-2-yl]-3-hydroxyl butyric acid (Compound 41)
Synthesis of compound 41-e
At room temperature, 7.0M NaOH aq. solution (2mL) was added to a solution of compound 37-e (1.0g, 3.5mmol) in methanol (4mL) and THF (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. Water (30mL) was added to the residue, 1M citric acid aq. solution was added to adjust pH=3, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give compound 41-e (740mg, yield 82%).
Synthesis of compound 41-d
At room temperature, N,O-dimethylhydroxylamine hydrochloride (546mg, 5.6mmol), 1-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (1.08g, 5.6mmol), 1-hydroxybenzotriazole (378mg, 2.8mmol) and triethyl amine (1.13g, 11.2mmol) were added to a solution of compound 41-e (720mg, 2.8mmol) in DMF (10mL) and DCM (30mL). The mixture was stirred for 24hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 41-d (740mg, yield 82%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 301 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 41-c
At -78°C, 3M methyl magnesium bromide in ether (1mL, 3mmol) was added to a solution of compound 41-d (604mg, 2mmol) in anhydrous THF (20mL). The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature and further stirred for 20mins, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (5mL), water (20mL) and EA (30mL) in turn. The organic phase was seperated, the aqueous phase was extracted with EA (20mL×2). The organic phases were combined, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA=8:1) to give compound 41-c (740mg, yield 82%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 256 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 41-b
Under N2 atmosphere, Zn powder (65mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 41-c (257mg, 1mmol) and ethyl bromoacetate (217mg, 1.3mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was heated to 50°C and further stirred for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (5mL) and water (20mL) in turn. The mixture was extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA=4:1) to give compound 41-b (281mg, yield 82%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 344 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 41-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 41-b (137mg, 1mmol), compound 3-c (140mg, 0.5mmol) and sodium carbonate (106mg, 1mmol) were suspended in ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (15mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene] palladium dichloride (50mg, 0.06mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 75°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 41-a (160mg, yield 96%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 417 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 41
At room temperature, 1.0M LiOH aq. solution (5mL) was added to a solution of compound 41-a (42mg, 0.1mmol) in methanol (5mL) and THF (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure. Water (10mL) was added to the residue, 1M citric acid aq. solution was added to adjust pH=3, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 41 (30mg, yield 77%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 389 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.08 (s, br. 1H), 9.31 (s, 1H), 8.44 (s, 1H), 8.32 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.87 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.73 (t, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.62 -7.67 (m, 1H), 7.59 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 6.79 (d, J=10.0 Hz, 1H), 2.65-2.76 (m, 2H), 1.56 (d, J=6.0 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 42
3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[2,3-c]pyridin-2-yl] butyric acid (Compound 42)
Synthesis of compound 42-b
At 20°C, thionyl chloride (2mL) was added to a solution of compound 41-a (160mg, 0.4mmol) in DCM (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 42-b. The product was used directly for the next step without further purification.
Synthesis of compound 42-a
At 0°C, NaBH4 (114mg, 3mmol) was added to a solution of compound 42-b, 10% Pd-C (30mg) and ethanol (10mL) in portions. The mixture was warmed to room temperature and stirred for 16hrs, filtered through celite. Water (10mL) was added to the filtrate, the mixture was extracted with DCM (10mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give compound 42-a (62mg, yield 42%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 401 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 42
At room temperature, 1M LiOH aq. solution (5mL) was added to a solution of compound 42-a (40mg, 0.1mmol) in methanol (5mL) and THF (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, and concentrated under reduced pressure. Water (10mL) was added to the residue, 1M citric acid aq. solution was added to adjust pH=3, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 42 (20mg, yield 53%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CDCl3) δ: 9.12 (s, 1H), 8.43 (s, 1H), 8.36 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 8.01 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.69-7.74 (m, 1H), 7.61 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 7.47 -7.55 (m, 2H), 6.67 (d, J=4.4 Hz, 1H), 3.59-3.64 (m, 1H), 2.58-2.74 (m, 2H), 1.24 (d, J=9.0 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 43
Compound 43A
Compound 43B
Synthesis of compound 43A
Compound 42-a (170mg) underwent enantiomeric chromatographic column (process II, mobile phase: n-Hexane (0.1% DEA): EtOH (0.1% DEA) = 80:20), compound 43A-a (59mg) (Tr = 18.0min) was eluted firstly and compound 43B-a (46mg) (Tr = 20.0min) was eluted later, the absolute configuration of 43A-a and 43B-a remains unknown. At room temperature, 1M LiOH aq. solution (2.5mL) was added to a solution of 43A-a (59mg, 0.14mmol) in methanol (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 4hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. Water (10mL) was added to the residue, 1M citric acid aq. solution was added to adjust pH=6, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 43A (38mg, yield 69%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.20 (s, 1H), 9.31 (s, 1H), 8.43 (s, 1H), 8.45 (s, 1H), 8.30 (dd, J=20.3 Hz, 7.9 Hz, 1H), 7.87 (t, J=7.4 Hz, 1H), 7.81 -7.52 (m, 3H), 6.67 (d, J=5.7 Hz, 1H), 3.50 (dd, J=13.4 Hz, 6.4 Hz, 1H), 2.57 (dd, J=9.7 Hz, 6.30 Hz, 1H), 1.28 (d, J=9.0 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Synthesis of compound 43B
At room temperature, 1M LiOH aq. solution (2.5mL) was added to a solution of 43B-a (46mg, 0.11mmol) in methanol (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 4hrs, concentrated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. Water (10mL) was added to the residue, 1M citric acid aq. solution was added to adjust pH=6, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 43B (25mg, yield 58%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.19 (s, 1H), 8.47-8.28 (m, 2H), 8.18 (d, J=7.4 Hz, 1H), 7.93-7.78 (m, 1H), 7.70 (d, J=7.4 Hz, 1H), 7.63 (t, J=3.7 Hz, 1H), 6.75 (d, J=8.6 Hz, 1H), 3.61 (dd, J=13.6 Hz, 6.9 Hz, 1H), 2.73-2.56 (m, 2H), 1.40 (d, J=9.0 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 44
Compound 44A
Compound 44B
Synthesis of compound 44-f
At room temperature, LiOH (1.68g, 40mmol) was added to a solution of compound 29-b (5.7g, 20mmol) in methanol (10mL), THF (40mL) and water (10mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 2M HCl (20mL) and water (20mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (50mL), dried under vacuum to give compound 44-f (4.5g, yield 100%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 258 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 44-e
At room temperature, N,O-dimethylhydroxylamine hydrochloride (1.6g, 3mmol), 1-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (5.6g, 3mmol), 1-hydroxybenzotriazole (4.04g, 3mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (3.9g, 3mmol) were added to a solution of compound 44-f (4.9g, 3mmol) in DCM (100mL). The mixture was stirred for 8hrs, followed by adding 2M HCl (50mL) and water (20mL), being extracted with DCM (80mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give compound 44-e (6g, yield 100%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 301 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 44-d
At -78°C, a solution of 1.5M methyl magnesium bromide in ether (20mL, 30mmol) was added dropwise to a solution of compound 44-e (6.0g, 20mmol) in anhydrous THF (100mL). The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature and further stirred for 20mins, saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (30mL) was added, the mixture was extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1-1:1) to give compound 44-d (4.8g, yield 94%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 256 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 44-c
At 0°C, triethyl phosphonoacetate (5.6mL, 20mmol) and sodium hydride (1.6g, 20mmol) were added to a solution of compound 44-d (4.8g, 18.9mmol) in THF (100mL) respectively. The mixture was stirred for 1h, warmed to room temperature, followed by adding NH4Cl aq. solution (100mL), being extracted with EA (100mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (100mL×3) and saturated brine (100mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give light yellow solid 44-c (5.2g, yield 89%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =326 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 44-b
At 0°C, NaBH4 (0.38g, 10mmol) was added into a solution of compound 44-c (5.2g, 16mmol) and NiCl2 (1.3g, 10mmol) in methanol (50mL). The mixture was stirred for 3hrs, warmed to room temperature, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aqueous solution (100mL), being extracted with EA (10mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (50mL×3) and saturated brine (50mL), dried over anhydride sodium sulfate, filtered, and evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified with silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 4:1) to give light yellow solid 44-b (2.24g, yield 43%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z =328 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 44A-a and 44B-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 44-b (327mg, 1mmol), 4-cyanophenyl boronic acid (150mg, 1mmol) and sodium carbonate (212mg, 2mmol) were suspended in dioxane (8mL) and water (2mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (60mg, 0.1mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, and then cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was in turn washed with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give racemic compound, followed by separating by enantiomeric chromatographic column (process I, mobile phase: Hexane:EtOH:DEA =70:30:0.1), compound 44A-a (80mg, yield 22.8%; LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 351 [M+H]+) (Tr = 6.0min) was diluted firstly and compound 44B-a (90mg, yield 25.6%; LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 351 [M+H]+) (Tr = 7.0 min) was diluted later. Absolute configuration of 44A-a and 44B-a remains unknown.
Synthesis of compound 44A
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 44A-a (70mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (2mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution (1mL) and water (2mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give compound 44A (53mg, yield 82%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 323 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.30 (s, 1H), 9.07 (s, 1H), 8.52 (s, 1H), 8.06 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.97 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.51 (s, 1H), 3.58 (m, 1H), 2.66 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 1.37 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Synthesis of compound 44B
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 44B-a (70mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (2mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution (1mL) and water (2mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give compound 44B (39mg, yield 60.6%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 323 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.30 (s, 1H), 9.07 (s, 1H), 8.52 (s, 1H), 8.06 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.97 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.51 (s, 1H), 3.58 (m, 1H), 2.66 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 1.37 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 45
Compound 45A
Compound 45B
Synthesis of compound 45A-a and 45B-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 44-b (800mg, 2.5mmol), compound 3-c (750mg, 2.5mmol) and sodium carbonate (510mg, 5mmol) were suspended in dioxane (8mL) and water (2mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (140mg, 0.25mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred for 3hrs at 80°C, cooled to room temperature, filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (50mL). The filtrate was washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA=1:1) to give racemic compound, followed by separating by enantiomeric chromatographic column (process II, mobile phase: CO2:Methanol (0.1% NH4OH) = 65:35), compound 45A-a was diluted firstly (260 mg, yield 26%; LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 401 [M+H]+) (Tr = 8.5min), and compound 45B-a (230mg, yield 23%; LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 401 [M+H]+) (Tr = 10.5min) was diluted later. Absolute configuration of 45A-a and 45B-a remains unknown.
Synthesis of compound 45A
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 45A-a (80mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (2mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution (1mL) and water (2mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give compound 45A (61mg, yield 82%). [α]25D = +26.248 (c=1.1018 MeOH), LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.27 (s, 1H), 9.17 (s, 1H), 8.43 (s, 1H), 8.33 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.90 (dd, J=7.2 Hz, 5.6 Hz, 1H), 7.83 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.68 (dd, J=6.8 Hz, 6.0 Hz, 1H), 7.64 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.52 (s, 1H), 3.50 (m, 1H), 2.60 (m, 2H), 1.31 (dd, J=7.6 Hz, 6.8 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Synthesis of compound 45B
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 45B-a (80mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (2mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution (1mL) and water (2mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give compound 45B (56mg, yield 75%). [α]25D = -25.594 (c=1.002 MeOH), LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.27 (s, 1H), 9.17 (s, 1H), 8.43 (s, 1H), 8.33 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.90 (dd, J=7.2 Hz, 5.6 Hz, 1H), 7.83 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.68 (dd, J=6.8 Hz, 6.0 Hz, 1H), 7.64 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.52 (s, 1H), 3.50 (m, 1H), 2.60 (m, 2H), 1.31 (dd, J=7.6 Hz, 6.8 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 46
Compound 46A
Compound 46B
Synthesis of compound 46-b
Under N2 atmosphere, at -78°C, 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (2.0mL, 5mmol) was slowly added to a solution of diisopropylamine (505mg, 5mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL) dropwise. The mixture was stirred for 15mins, followed by adding a solution of compound 30-b (630mg, 2mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL) dropwise, the mixture was stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding CH3I (720mg, 5mmol) and the mixture was further stirred for 3hrs. The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (30mL), being extracted with EA (30mL×3). The organic phases were combined, washed in turn with water (10mL) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1-1:1) to give compound 46-b (170mg, yield 26%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 328 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 46A-a and 46B-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 46-b (170mg, 0.52mmol), compound 3-c (145mg, 0.52mmol) and sodium carbonate (120mg, 1.13mmol) were suspended in dioxane (4mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (43mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 3hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (30mL). The filtrate was washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give racemic compound, followed by separating by enantiomeric chromatographic column (process I, mobile phase: Hexane : EtOH:DEA = 80:20:0.1), compound 46A-a was eluted firstly (66mg, yield 31%; LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 401 [M+H]+) (Tr = 14.0min) and compound 46B-a was eluted later (61mg, yield 29%; LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 401 [M+H]+) (Tr = 18.0min). Absolute configuration of 46A-a and 46B-a remains unknown.
Synthesis of compound 46A
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 46A-a (60mg, 0.15mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution (1mL) and water (10mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give compound 46A (26mg, yield 46%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.31 (s, 1H), 9.17 (s, 1H), 8.44 (s, 1H), 8.33 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.88 (m, 2H), 7.66 (m, 2H), 7.49 (s, 1H), 3.16 (m, 1H), 3.02 (m, 1H), 2.68 (m, 1H), 1.23 (d, J=6.8 Hz, 1H) ppm.
Synthesis of compound 46B
At room temperature, LiOH (42mg, 1mmol) was added to a solution of compound 46B-a (60mg, 0.15mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (4mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution (1mL) and water (10mL), solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give compound 46B (26mg, yield 46%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.31 (s, 1H), 9.17 (s, 1H), 8.44 (s, 1H), 8.33 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.88 (m, 2H), 7.66 (m, 2H), 7.49 (s, 1H), 3.16 (m, 1H), 3.02 (m, 1H), 2.68 (m, 1H), 1.23 (d, J=6.8 Hz, 1H) ppm.
Embodiment 47
3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[2,3-c]pyridin-2-yl]-2,2-dimethyl propionic acid (Compound 47)
Synthesis of compound 47-d
At -78°C, 1M Lithium diisopropylamide in THF (3mL, 3mmol) was slowly added to a solution of methyl isobutyrate (306mg, 3mmol) in anhydrous THF (4mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding compound 37-c (242mg, 1mmol), the mixture was further stirred for 1h. The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature, followed by adding saturated NaHCO3 aq. solution (20mL), being extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 47-d (425mg). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 344 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 47-c
Thionyl chloride (6mL) was added to a solution of compound 47-d (425mg) in DCM (10mL). The mixture was heated to 40°C, stirred for 16hrs and concentrated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. Water (15mL) was added to the residue, the mixture was extracted with EA (15mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 47-c (487mg). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 364 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 47-b
At room temperature, NaBH4 (204mg, 5.37mmol) was added to a mixture of compound 47-c (487mg), 10% Pd-C (50mg) and ethanol (20mL) in portions, the mixture was stirred for 16hrs. The mixture was filtered through celite, the filtrate cake was washed with ethanol (10mL×3). The filtrate was concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 5:1) to give compound 47-b (135 mg, yield 31%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 328 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 47-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 47-b (135mg, 0.41mmol), compound 3-c (121mg, 0.43mmol) and sodium sulfate (106mg, 1mmol) were suspended in dioxane (8mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (30mg, 0.04mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 90°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA=3:1) to give compound 47-a (130mg, yield 79%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 401 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 47
At room temperature, LiOH (55mg, 1.3mmol) was added to a solution of compound 47-a (130mg, 0.32mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (5mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution to adjust pH=5-6, being extracted with EA (15mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was prepared by HPLC (mobile phase: 10mM NH4HCO3 aq. solution: acetonitrile =35%-45%) to give white solid 47 (13mg, yield 10.5%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 387 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CD3OD) δ: 9.22 (s, 1H), 8.39 (s, 1H), 8.22 (d, J=8.1 Hz, 1H), 8.10-8.01 (m, 1H), 7.71 (dd, J=7.9 Hz, 3.7 Hz, 1H), 7.60 (d, J=7.1 Hz, 1H), 7.50 (s, 2H), 6.68 (s, 1H), 3.13-3.02 (m, 2H), 1.19 (s, 3H), 1.18 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 48
3-[4-(4-Cyanophenyl)thieno[2,3-c]pyridin-2-yl]-2,2-dimethyl propionic acid (Compound 48)
Synthesis of compound 48-c
Thionyl chloride (5mL) was added to a solution of compound 37-d (200mg, 0.82mmol) in DCM (10mL). The mixture was heated to 30°C, stirred for 16hrs, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 48-c (236mg). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 264 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 48-b
Under N2 atmosphere, at -78°C, a solution of 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (1.37mL, 3.43mmol) was slowly added to a solution of diisopropylamine (347mg, 3.43mmol) in anhydrous THF (10mL). The mixture was warmed to 0°C and further stirred for 1h, then cooled again to -78°C, methyl isobutyrate (350mg, 3.43mmol) was added, the mixture was stirred for 1h, followed by adding compound 48-c (180mg, 0.69mmol) and further stirred for 1h. The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature, stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (20mL), being extracted with EA (50mL×2). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 48-b (280mg, yield 97%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 329 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 48-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 48-b (280mg, 0.85mmol), 4-cyanophenylboronic acid (138mg, 0.94mmol) and sodium sulfate (180mg, 1.7mmol) were suspended in dioxane (15mL) and water (2mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene]palladium dichloride (62mg, 0.08mmol) was added. The mixture was added at 90°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 48-a (135mg, yield 45%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 351 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 48
At room temperature, LiOH (65mg, 1.54mmol) was added to a solution of compound 48-a (135mg, 0.38mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (5mL) and water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 6hrs, 1M HCl aq. solution was added to adjust pH=5-6, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was adjusted to pH=7-8 with 2M NaOH aq. solution, and then extracted with EA (10mL) to remove the impurities. The aqueous phase was adjusted to pH=5-6 with 1M HCl aq. solution, extracted with EA (15mL×2). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give yellow solid 48 (75 mg, yield 58%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 337 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.52 (s, 1H), 9.21 (s, 1H), 8.48 (s, 1H), 8.03 (d, J=8.2 Hz, 2H), 7.84 (d, J=8.2 Hz, 2H), 7.30 (s, 1H), 3.21 (s, 2H), 1.16 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 49
2-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)isoquinolin-6-yl]-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 49)
Synthetic route
Synthesis of compound 49-a
Under N2 atmosphere, trimethylchlorosilane (11mg, 0.1mmol) was added dropwise to a solution of Zn powder (130mg, 2mmol) and THF (4mL). The mixture was stirred for 15mins at room temperature, heated to 40°C, followed by adding a solution of methyl 2-bromoisobutyrate (181mg, 1mmol) in THF (2mL). The mixture was further stirred at 40°C for 30mins, added to a mixture of compound 5-b (90mg, 0.25mmol), LiCl (11mg, 0.25mmol), tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (23mg, 0.025mmol), 2-dicyclohexylphospho-2',6-diisopropoxy-1,1'-biphenyl (12mg, 0.025mmol) and THF (4mL). The mixture was heated to 80°C and further stirred for 1h, and then cooled to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure to remove the solvent. The residue was dissolved in DCM (50mL), washed in turn with water (20mL×3) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica preparative plate chromatography (DCM: methanol = 20:1) to give compound 49-a (40mg, yield 42%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 381 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 49
At room temperature, LiOH (22mg, 0.5mmol) was added to a solution of compound 49-a (40mg, 0.1mmol) in methanol (1mL) and THF (3mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, evaporated to remove the solvent, followed by adding water (5mL), being extracted with EA (10mL×3). 1M HCl aq. solution was added to the aqueous phase to adjust pH=5-6, extracted with EA (15mL×3), the organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was prepared by HPLC (mobile phase: water (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid): nitrile =25%-40%) to give compound 49 (15mg, yield 39%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 367 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CDCl3) δ: 9.39 (s, 1H), 8.50 (s, 1H), 8.36 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 8.13 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.77 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.72-7.67 (m, 1H), 7.58 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.48-7.46 (m, 2H), 7.34 (s, 1H), 1.45 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 50
2- {[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)phthalazin-6-yl]thio}-2-methyl propionic acid (Compound 50)
Synthetic route
Synthesis of compound 50-f
6-Bromo-phthalide (2.30g, 10.9mmol) was added to a solution of N-bromosuccinimide (2.1g, 11.8mmol), azobisisobutyronitrile (0.1g, 0.06mmol) in 1,2-dichloroethane (60mL). The mixture was heated to reflux for 2hrs, cooled to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was washed with water (10mL×3) to give compound 50-f. The product was used directly for the next step without further purification.
Synthesis of compound 50-e
A mixture of compound 50-f and water (40mL) was heated to reflux for 2hrs, cooled to room temperature, white solid was precipitated and filtered out. Solid was washed with water (20mL×3), dried under vacuum to give compound 50-e (1.6g, yield 64%). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification.
Synthesis of compound 50-d
85% Hydrazine hydrate (2mL) was added to a solution of compound 50-e (1.60g, 7mmol) in isopropyl alcohol (40mL). The mixture was heated to reflux for 2hrs, cooled to room temperature, white solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (20mL×3), dried under vacuum to give compound 50-d (1.2g, yield 76%). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification.
Synthesis of compound 50-c
A mixture of compound 50-d (600mg, 2.67mmol) and POCl3 (8mL) was heated to reflux for 1.5h, cooled to room temperature and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in DCM (40mL), washed in turn with saturated sodium bicarbonate (40mL) and saturated brine (10mL), dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 50-c (500mg, yield 75%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 243 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 50-b
Under N2 atmosphere, tris(dibenzylidene indene acetone)dipalladium (30mg, 0.03mmol) and 4,5-bis(diphenylphosphine)-9,9-dimethyloxacanthracene (38mg, 0.06mmol) were added to a solution of compound 50-c (131mg, 0.5mmol), ethyl 2-methyl-2-mercaptopropionate (73mg, 0.5mmol) and diisopropylethylamine (193mg, 1.5mmol) in dioxane (10mL). The mixture was stirred at 100°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 50-b (120mg, yield 77%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 311 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 50-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 50-b (120mg, 0.38mmol), compound 3-c (111mg, 0. 4mmol) and sodium carbonate (170mg, 2.8mmol) were suspended in ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (10mL) and water (1mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene] palladium dichloride (43mg, 0.05mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 4hrs, cooled to room temperature and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 2:1) to give compound 50-a (96mg, yield 60%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 428 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 50
At room temperature, 1M LiOH aq. solution (3.0mL) was added to a solution of compound 50-a (86mg, 0.2mmol) in methanol (4mL) and THF (8mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in water (10mL), adjusted to pH=3 with 1M HCl aq. solution, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (5mL), dried under vacuum to give white solid 50 (60mg, yield 75%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 400 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.77 (s, br. 1H,), 9.87 (s, 1H), 8.39 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 8.30 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.98-8.00 (m, 1H), 7.85-7.90 (m, 2H), 7.62 (t, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.47 (d, J=8.8 Hz, 1H), 7.42 (s, 1H), 1.32 (s, 3H), 1.26 (s, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 51
3-[4-(4-Cyanophenyl)isoquinolin-6-yl]-2,2-dimethyl propionic acid (Compound 51) Synthetic route
Synthesis of compound 51-d
At 0°C, lithium aluminum hydride (214mg, 5.64mmol) was suspended in anhydrous THF (100mL), a solution of compound 19-f (1.5g, 5.64mmol) in THF (10mL) was slowly added. The mixture was stirred for 10mins, Na2SO4 • 10H2O (2.0g) was added in portions, then the mixture was warmed to room temperature and further stirred for 30mins. The mixture was filtered, the filtrate cake was washed with EA (20mL). The filtrate was concentrated under reduced pressure, the residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give compound 51-d (600mg, yield 44%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 238 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 51-c
Thionyl chloride (1.84mL) was added to a solution of compound 51-d (600mg, 2.52mmol) in DCM (25mL). The mixture was heated to 30°C, stirred for 16hrs and concentrated under reduced pressure to give compound 51-c (720mg). The product was used directly for the next step without further purification. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 256 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 51-b
Under N2 atmosphere, at -78°C, a solution of 2.5M n-butyl lithium in n-hexane (2.05mL, 5.1mmol) was added to a solution of diisopropylamine (0.72mL, 5.1mmol) in anhydrous THF (20mL). The mixture was warmed to room temperature, stirred for 1h, cooled again to -78°C. The mixture was added to methyl isobutyrate (0.59mL, 5.1mmol), stirred for 1h, followed by adding compound 51-c (300mg, 1.02mmol) and further stirred for 1h. The mixture was slowly warmed to room temperature, stirred for 2hrs, followed by adding saturated NH4Cl aq. solution (20mL), being extracted with EA (50mL×2). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1) to give yellow oil 51-b (300mg, yield 91%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 322 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 51-a
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 51-b (300mg, 0.93mmol), 4-cyanophenylboronic acid (215mg, 0.93mmol) and sodium carbonate (296mg, 2.79mmol) were suspended in DMF (10mL) and water (5mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene] palladium dichloride (76mg, 0.09mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 3:1-2:1) to give compound 51-a (250mg, yield 78%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 345 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 51
At room temperature, LiOH (152mg, 3.6mmol) was added to a solution of compound 51-a (250mg, 0.72mmol) in methanol (1mL), THF (5mL) and water (2mL). The mixture was stirred for 6hrs, 1M HCl aq. solution was added to adjust pH=5-6, the mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure, extracted with EA (20mL×3). The organic phases were combined, dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was prepared by HPLC (mobile phase: water (0.01% NH3+10 mm NH4HCO3) : nitrile = 45%-75%) to give compound 51 (33mg, yield 14%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 331 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, CDCl3) δ: 9.19 (s, 1H), 8.36 (s, 1H), 7.94 (m, 1H), 7.51-7.65 (m, 6H), 3.06 (s, 2H), 1.27 (s, 6H) ppm.
Embodiment 52
3-[7-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridine-2-yl]-butyric acid (Compound 52)
Synthetic route
Synthesis of compound 52-b
Under N2 atmosphere, compound 44-c (9.0g, 27.6mmol), compound 3-c (15.4g, 55.2mmol) and sodium carbonate (5.85g, 55.2mmol) were suspended in dioxane (240mL) and water (40mL), [1,1'-bis(diphenylphosphine)ferrocene] palladium dichloride (1.0g, 1.38mmol) was added. The mixture was stirred at 80°C for 16hrs, cooled to room temperature, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 10:1) to give yellow solid 52-b (9.1g, yield 82.8%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 399 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 52-a
Under H2 (1atm.) atmosphere, palladium hydroxide (3.0g) was added to a solution of compound 52-b (9.1g, 22.8mmol) in THF (100mL) and methanol (280mL). The mixture was stirred for 16hrs, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by silica column chromatography (PE:EA = 1:1) to give yellow oil 52-a (8.0g, yield 87.5%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 401 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 52
At room temperature, LiOH (1.51g, 36mmol) was added to a solution of compound 52-a (8.0g, 20mmol) in methanol (15mL), THF (30mL) and water (5mL). The mixture was stirred for 8hrs, followed by adding 1M HCl aq. solution to adjust pH=5-6, solid was precipitated and filtered out. The solid was washed with water (20mL×3), dried under vacuum to give white solid 52 (6.18g, yield 83%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M+H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.27 (s, 1H), 9.17 (s, 1H), 8.43 (s, 1H), 8.33 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.90 (dd, J=7.2 Hz, 5.6 Hz, 1H), 7.83 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.68 (dd, J=6.8 Hz, 6.0 Hz, 1H), 7.64 (d, J=8.4 Hz, 1H), 7.52 (s, 1H), 3.50 (m, 1H), 2.60 (m, 2H), 1.31 (dd, J=7.6 Hz, 6.8 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 53
Compound 53A
Synthetic route
Synthesis of compound 53A
At room temperature, NaOH (8mg, 0.02mmol) was added to a solution of compound 45A (74mg, 0.02mmol) in water (1mL). The mixture was stirred for 2hrs, freeze-dried to give white solid 53A (79mg, yield 100%). LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 373 [M-Na+2H]+.1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 9.11 (s, 1H), 8.38 (s, 1H), 8.32 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 8.27 (d, J=8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.88 (t, J=6.4 Hz, 1H), 7.82 (d, J=7.2 Hz, 1H), 7.65 (m, 2H), 7.42 (s, 1H), 3.47 (m, 1H), 2.23 (m, 1H), 2.11 (m, 1H), 1.25 (dd, J=7.2 Hz, 6.8 Hz, 3H) ppm.
Embodiment 54
3-[4-(4-Cyanonaphthalen-1-yl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridine-2-yl]-2,2-bis(triadecylmethyl) propionic acid (Compound 54)
Synthesis of compound 54-b
According to the process for preparing compound 48-b, compound 54-b (1000mg, 46%) was prepared by using commercially available compound 54-c. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 349 [M+H]+.
According to the process for preparing compound 47-a, compound 54-a (500mg, 72%) was prepared by using compound 54-b. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 421 [M+H]+.
Synthesis of compound 54
According to the process for preparing compound 47, white solid compound 54 (63mg, 32%) was prepared by compound 47-a. LC-MS (ESI): m/z = 394 [M+H]+. 1H-NMR (400MHz, DMSO-d6) δ: 12.46(s, 1H), 9.30 (s, 1H), 8.45(s, 1H), 8.32(d, J=8Hz, 1H), 8.26(d, J=8Hz, 1H), 7.89(d, J=8Hz, 1H), 7.74(d, J=8Hz, 1H) , 7.65 (m, 1H), 7.59 (m, 1H), 6.67(s, 1H), 3.09(s, 2H) ppm
Effect Example Biological assessment
Example 1: the inhibitory activity against URAT1 of the compound of the present invention
Human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293) was incubated in DMEM tissue culture medium, at 37°C, under 5% CO2 and 95% air atmosphere. TransIT-293 transfection agent (MIRUS BIO, Cat. No. MIR2706) and model URAT1 were used to construct transfected HEK293 cells. Transfected HEK293/hURAT1 cells were used to the test for 14C-uric acid transport activity.
HEK293/hURAT1 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate (BD, Cat. No. 356461) fully coating with poly-D-lysine at a density of 6×104 cells per well. Cells were incubated at 37°C for at least 12hrs in the calorstat, and then washed with pre-heated washing buffer (125mM sodium gluconate, 10mM HEPES pH=7.4) at an amount of 200µL per well to wash out the culture medium. The uric acid [8-14C] (ARC, Cat. No. ARC0513-250UCI) containing or not containing the compound was added to 50µL HBSS buffer which was free of chloric ion each well (HBSS buffer: 125mM sodium gluconate, 4.8mM potassium gluconate, 1.3mM calcium gluconate, 1.2mM potassium dihydrogen phosphate, 1.2mM magnesium sulfate, 5.6mM glucose, 25mM HEPES pH=7.4) to make the specific concentration of the uric acid 1µCi per well. The incubating solution was removed after 10mins incubation, followed by adding 100µL cold washing buffer, after washing with this buffer for 3 times, the buffer was completely removed from the well. 50µL Lysis buffer (0.1mM NaOH) was added to each well, and transferred to a 96-well plate (PERKIN ELMER, Cat. No. 6005040) containing scintillation fluid after 5mins, and counted by MicroBeta Trilux (PerkinElmer) to give IC50 value eventually.
The inhibitory activity of the compound of the present invention against hURAT1 was tested according to the assessment above, the results were listed below (Table 1):
<table>
<header>
Compound & IC50 (µM) & Compound & IC50 (µM)
</header>
<header>
Verinurad (RDEA3170) & 0.113 & 30 & 0.087
</header>
1 & 2.534 & 31 & 3.418
2 & 0.161 & 32 & 5.405
3 & 0.327 & 33 & 0.042
4 & 0.015 & 34 & 0.139
5 & 0.008 & 35 & 2.408
6 & 0.214 & 36 & 0.542
7A & 5.524 & 37 & 0.035
7B & 2.687 & 38 & 0.209
8 & 0.057 & 40 & 3.467
9 & 0.127 & 41 & 0.934
10 & 0.019 & 42 & 0.024
11 & 0.062 & 43A & 0.011
12 & 0.071 & 43B & 0.037
13 & 0.189 & 44A & 0.038
14 & 0.385 & 44B & 1.858
15 & 0.024 & 45A & 0.580
16 & 0.015 & 45B & 0.010
17 & 0.012 & 46A & 0.148
21 & 0.100 & 46B & 0.051
22 & 0.055 & 47 & 0.018
23 & 0.018 & 48 & 0.012
24 & 0.018 & 49 & 0.116
25 & 0.289 & 50 & 0.971
26 & 0.119 & 51 & 0.019
27 & 1.731 & 52 & 0.037
29 & 2.858 & / & /
</table>
Compound Verinurad (RDEA3170, CAS No.: 1352792-74-5) was a known hURAT1 inhibitor having a structure shown as below:
What can be concluded from Table 1 was that compounds of the present invention are of significantly inhibitory effects against hURAT1.
It is to be understood that the foregoing description of two preferred embodiments is intended to be purely illustrative of the principles of the invention, rather than exhaustive thereof, and that changes and variations will be apparent to those skilled in the art, and that the present invention is not intended to be limited other than expressly set forth in the following claims.