TECHNICAL FIELD
This application describes reactive leuco compounds, laundry care compositions containing such reactive leuco compounds, and the use of such compounds and compositions in the laundering of textile articles. These types of compounds are provided in a stable, substantially colorless state and then may be transformed to an intense colored state upon exposure to certain physical or chemical changes such as, for example, exposure to oxygen, ion addition, exposure to light, and the like. The laundry care compositions containing the leuco compounds are designed to enhance the apparent or visually perceived whiteness of, or to impart a desired hue to, textile articles washed or otherwise treated with the laundry care composition.
BACKGROUND
As textile substrates age, their color tends to fade or yellow due to exposure to light, air, soil, and natural degradation of the fibers that comprise the substrates. As such, to visually enhance these textile substrates and counteract the fading and yellowing the use of polymeric colorants for coloring consumer products has become well known in the prior art. For example, it is well known to use whitening agents, either optical brighteners or bluing agents, in textile applications. However, traditional whitening agents tend to lose efficacy upon storage due to deleterious interactions with other formulation components (such as, for example, perfumes). Further, such whitening agents can suffer from poor deposition on textile substrates. As such, formulators tend to increase the level of whitening agent used to counteract any efficacy lost upon storage and/or to increase the amount of whitening agent available to deposit on the textile substrate.
Leuco dyes are also known in the prior art to exhibit a change from a colorless or slightly colored state to a colored state upon exposure to specific chemical or physical triggers. The change in coloration that occurs is typically visually perceptible to the human eye. All existing compounds have some absorbance in the visible light region (400-750 nm), and thus more or less have some color. In this invention, a dye is considered as a “leuco dye” if it did not render a significant color at its application concentration and conditions, but renders a significant color in its triggered form. The color change upon triggering stems from the change of the molar attenuation coefficient (also known as molar extinction coefficient, molar absorption coefficient, and/or molar absorptivity in some literatures) of the leuco dye molecule in the 400-750 nm range, preferably in the 500-650 nm range, and most preferably in the 530-620 nm range. The increase of the molar attenuation coefficient of a leuco dye before and after the triggering should be greater than 50%, more preferably greater than 200%, and most preferably greater than 500%.
As such, there remains a need for an effective whitening agent that effectively deposits on textile substrates.
It has now surprisingly been found that the presently claimed reactive leuco compounds not only provide the desired consumer whiteness benefit, but laundry care compositions (e.g., detergents) containing these compounds deliver increasing whiteness. Furthermore, it has surprisingly been found that hydrolyzed derivatives of such reactive leuco compounds can be used to impart the desired consumer whiteness benefit with the prospect of reducing the risk of irritation and/or sensitization of the respiratory tract and/or skin typically associated with reactive compounds.
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
In a first embodiment, the invention provides a leuco composition comprising at least one reactive leuco compound, the reactive leuco compound comprising a leuco moiety and at least one reactive moiety covalently bound to the leuco moiety. The reactive moiety preferably is sufficiently electrophilic to react with a nucleophilic moiety selected from the group consisting of amine groups, hydroxy groups, and sulfhydryl groups. The ratio of the amount of the reactive leuco compound present in the composition to the amount of a colored form of the reactive leuco compound present in the leuco composition is about 1 (or more):9.
In a second embodiment, the invention provides a laundry care composition comprising a laundry care ingredient and a leuco composition as described herein. In one aspect, the invention provides a laundry care composition comprising: (i) from 2 to 70 wt. % of a surfactant; and (ii) from 0.0001 to 20.0 wt. % of a leuco composition as described herein.
In a third embodiment, the invention provides a method of treating a textile comprises the steps of (i) treating a textile with an aqueous solution containing a leuco composition as described herein, (ii) optionally, rinsing the textile, and (iii) drying the textile. In one aspect, the invention provides a method of treating a textile comprising the steps of: (i) treating a textile with an aqueous solution containing a leuco composition as described herein, the aqueous solution comprising from 10 ppb to 5000 ppm of at least one reactive leuco compound and from 0.0 g/L to 3 g/L of a surfactant; (ii) optionally rinsing; and (iii) drying the textile.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Definitions
As used herein, the term “alkoxy” is intended to include C1-C8 alkoxy and alkoxy derivatives of polyols having repeating units such as butylene oxide, glycidol oxide, ethylene oxide or propylene oxide.
As used herein, the interchangeable terms “alkyleneoxy” and “oxyalkylene,” and the interchangeable terms “polyalkyleneoxy” and “polyoxyalkylene,” generally refer to molecular structures containing one or more than one, respectively, of the following repeating units: -C2H4O-, -C3H6O-, -C4H8O-, and any combinations thereof. Non-limiting structures corresponding to these groups include -CH2CH2O-, -CH2CH2CH2O-, -CH2CH2CH2CH2O-, -CH2CH(CH3)O-, and -CH2CH(CH2CH3)O-, for example. Furthermore, the polyoxyalkylene constituent may be selected from the group consisting of one or more monomers selected from a C2-20 alkyleneoxy group, a glycidyl group, or mixtures thereof.
The terms “ethylene oxide,” “propylene oxide” and “butylene oxide” may be shown herein by their typical designation of “EO,” “PO” and “BO,” respectively.
As used herein, the terms “alkyl” and “alkyl capped” are intended to mean any univalent group formed by removing a hydrogen atom from a substituted or unsubstituted hydrocarbon. Non-limiting examples include hydrocarbyl moieties which are branched or unbranched, substituted or unsubstituted including C1-C18 alkyl groups, and in one aspect, C1-C6 alkyl groups.
As used herein, unless otherwise specified, the term “aryl” is intended to include C3-C12 aryl groups. The term “aryl” refers to both carbocyclic and heterocyclic aryl groups.
As used herein, the term “alkaryl” refers to any alkyl-substituted aryl substituents and aryl-substituted alkyl substituents. More specifically, the term is intended to refer to C7-16 alkyl-substituted aryl substituents and C7-16 aryl substituted alkyl substituents which may or may not comprise additional substituents.
As used herein, the term “detergent composition” is a sub-set of laundry care composition and includes cleaning compositions including but not limited to products for laundering fabrics. Such compositions may be pre-treatment composition for use prior to a washing step or may be rinse added compositions, as well as cleaning auxiliaries, such as bleach additives and “stain-stick” or pre-treat types.
As used herein, the term “laundry care composition” includes, unless otherwise indicated, granular, powder, liquid, gel, paste, unit dose, bar form and/or flake type washing agents and/or fabric treatment compositions, including but not limited to products for laundering fabrics, fabric softening compositions, fabric enhancing compositions, fabric freshening compositions, and other products for the care and maintenance of fabrics, and combinations thereof. Such compositions may be pre-treatment compositions for use prior to a washing step or may be rinse added compositions, as well as cleaning auxiliaries, such as bleach additives and/or “stain-stick” or pre-treat compositions or substrate-laden products such as dryer added sheets.
As used herein, the term “leuco” (as used in reference to, for example, a compound, moiety, radical, dye, monomer, fragment, or polymer) refers to an entity (e.g., organic compound or portion thereof) that, upon exposure to specific chemical or physical triggers, undergoes one or more chemical and/or physical changes that results in a shift from a first color state (e.g., uncolored or substantially colorless) to a second more highly colored state. Suitable chemical or physical triggers include, but are not limited to, oxidation, pH change, temperature change, and changes in electromagnetic radiation (e.g., light) exposure. Suitable chemical or physical changes that occur in the leuco entity include, but are not limited to, oxidation and non-oxidative changes, such as intramolecular cyclization. Thus, in one aspect, a suitable leuco entity can be a reversibly reduced form of a chromophore. In one aspect, the leuco moiety preferably comprises at least a first and a second π-system capable of being converted into a third combined conjugated π-system incorporating said first and second π-systems upon exposure to one or more of the chemical and/or physical triggers described above.
As used herein, the terms “leuco composition” or “leuco colorant composition” refers to a composition comprising at least two leuco compounds having independently selected structures as described in further detail herein.
As used herein “average molecular weight” of the leuco colorant is reported as a weight average molecular weight, as determined by its molecular weight distribution: as a consequence of their manufacturing process, the leuco colorants disclosed herein may contain a distribution of repeating units in their polymeric moiety.
As used herein, the terms “maximum extinction coefficient” and “maximum molar extinction coefficient” are intended to describe the molar extinction coefficient at the wavelength of maximum absorption (also referred to herein as the maximum wavelength), in the range of 400 nanometers to 750 nanometers.
As used herein, the term “first color” is used to refer to the color of the laundry care composition before triggering, and is intended to include any color, including colorless and substantially colorless.
As used herein, the term “second color” is used to refer to the color of the laundry care composition after triggering, and is intended to include any color that is distinguishable, either through visual inspection or the use of analytical techniques such as spectrophotometric analysis, from the first color of the laundry care composition.
As used herein, the term “converting agent” refers to any oxidizing agent as known in the art other than molecular oxygen in any of its known forms (singlet and triplet states).
As used herein, the term “triggering agent” refers to a reactant suitable for converting the leuco composition from a colorless or substantially colorless state to a colored state.
As used herein, the term “whitening agent” refers to a dye or a leuco colorant that may form a dye once triggered that when on white cotton provides a hue to the cloth with a relative hue angle of 210 to 345, or even a relative hue angle of 240 to 320, or even a relative hue angle of 250 to 300 (e.g., 250 to 290).
As used herein, “cellulosic substrates” are intended to include any substrate which comprises at least a majority by weight of cellulose. Cellulose may be found in wood, cotton, linen, jute, and hemp. Cellulosic substrates may be in the form of powders, fibers, pulp and articles formed from powders, fibers and pulp. Cellulosic fibers, include, without limitation, cotton, rayon (regenerated cellulose), acetate (cellulose acetate), triacetate (cellulose triacetate), and mixtures thereof. Articles formed from cellulosic fibers include textile articles such as fabrics. Articles formed from pulp include paper.
As used herein, articles such as “a” and “an” when used in a claim, are understood to mean one or more of what is claimed or described.
As used herein, the terms “include/s” and “including” are meant to be non-limiting.
As used herein, the term “solid” includes granular, powder, bar and tablet product forms.
As used herein, the term “fluid” includes liquid, gel, paste and gas product forms.
The test methods disclosed in the Test Methods Section of the present application should be used to determine the respective values of the parameters of Applicants' inventions.
Unless otherwise noted, all component or composition levels are in reference to the active portion of that component or composition, and are exclusive of impurities, for example, residual solvents or by-products, which may be present in commercially available sources of such components or compositions.
All percentages and ratios are calculated by weight unless otherwise indicated. All percentages and ratios are calculated based on the total composition unless otherwise indicated.
In one aspect, the molar extinction coefficient of said second colored state at the maximum absorbance in the wavelength in the range 200 to 1,000 nm (more preferably 400 to 750 nm) is preferably at least five times, more preferably 10 times, even more preferably 25 times, most preferably at least 50 times the molar extinction coefficient of said first color state at the wavelength of the maximum absorbance of the second colored state. Preferably, the molar extinction coefficient of said second colored state at the maximum absorbance in the wavelength in the range 200 to 1,000 nm (more preferably 400 to 750 nm) is at least five times, preferably 10 times, even more preferably 25 times, most preferably at least 50 times the maximum molar extinction coefficient of said first color state in the corresponding wavelength range. An ordinarily skilled artisan will realize that these ratios may be much higher. For example, the first color state may have a maximum molar extinction coefficient in the wavelength range from 400 to 750 nm of as little as 10 M−1cm−1, and the second colored state may have a maximum molar extinction coefficient in the wavelength range from 400 to 750 nm of as much as 80,000 M−1cm−1 or more, in which case the ratio of the extinction coefficients would be 8,000:1 or more.
In one aspect, the maximum molar extinction coefficient of said first color state at a wavelength in the range 400 to 750 nm is less than 1000 M−1cm−1, and the maximum molar extinction coefficient of said second colored state at a wavelength in the range 400 to 750 nm is more than 5,000 M−1cm−1, preferably more than 10,000, 25,000, 50,000 or even 100,000 M−1cm−1. A skilled artisan will recognize and appreciate that a polymer comprising more than one leuco moiety may have a significantly higher maximum molar extinction coefficient in the first color state (e.g., due to the additive effect of a multiplicity of leuco moieties or the presence of one or more leuco moieties converted to the second colored state). Where more than one leuco moiety is attached to a molecule, the maximum molar extinction coefficient of said second color state may be more than n×□ where n is the number of leuco moieties plus oxidized leuco moieties present on the molecule, and □ is selected from 5,000 M−1cm−1, preferably more than 10,000, 25,000, 50,000 or even 100,000 M−1cm−1. Thus for a molecule that has two leuco moieties, the maximum molar extinction coefficient of said second color state may be more than 10,000 M−1cm−1, preferably more than 20,000, 50,000, 100,000 or even 200,000 M−1cm−1. While n could theoretically be any integer, one skilled in the art appreciates that n will typically be from 1 to 100, more preferably 1 to 50, 1 to 25, 1 to 10 or even 1 to 5.
The present invention relates to a class of leuco colorants that may be useful for use in laundry care compositions, such as liquid laundry detergent, to provide a blue hue to whiten textile substrates. Leuco colorants are compounds that are essentially colorless or only lightly colored but are capable of developing an intense color upon activation. One advantage of using leuco compounds in laundry care compositions is that such compounds, being colorless until activated, allow the laundry care composition to exhibit its own color. The leuco colorant generally does not alter the primary color of the laundry care composition. Thus, manufacturers of such compositions can formulate a color that is most attractive to consumers without concern for added ingredients, such as bluing agents, affecting the final color value of the composition.
As noted above, in a first embodiment, the invention a leuco composition comprising at least one reactive leuco compound, the reactive leuco compound comprising a leuco moiety and at least one reactive moiety covalently bound to the leuco moiety.
The reactive leuco compound can comprise any suitable leuco moiety as defined above. In one aspect, the leuco moiety preferably is selected from the group consisting diarylmethane leuco moieties, triarylmethane leuco moieties, oxazine moieties, thiazine moieties, hydroquinone moieties, and arylaminophenol moieties and mixtures thereof.
Suitable diarylmethane leuco compounds for use herein include, but are not limited to, diarylmethylene derivatives capable of forming a second colored state as described herein. Suitable examples include, but are not limited to, Michler's methane, a diarylmethylene substituted with an -OH group (e.g., Michler's hydrol) and ethers and esters thereof, a diarylmethylene substituted with a photocleavable moiety, such as a -CN group (bis(para-N,N-dimethyl)phenyl)acetonitrile), and similar such compounds.
In a more particular preferred aspect, the leuco moiety is a univalent or polyvalent moiety derived by removal of one or more hydrogen atoms from a structure of Formula (I), (II), (III), (IV), or (V) below
wherein the ratio of Formula I-V to its oxidized form is at least 1:19, 1:9, or 1:3, preferably at least 1:1, more preferably at least 3:1, most preferably at least 9:1 or even 19:1.
In the structure of Formula (I), wherein each individual Ro, Rm and Rp group on each of rings A, B and C is independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, deuterium and R5; each R5 is independently selected from the group consisting of halogens, nitro, alkyl, substituted alkyl, aryl, substituted aryl, alkaryl, substituted alkaryl, -(CH2)n-O-R1, -(CH2)n-NR1R2, -C(O)R1, -C(O)OR1, -C(O)O−, -C(O)NR1R2, -OC(O)R1, -OC(O)OR1, -OC(O)NR1R2, -S(O)2R1, -S(O)2OR1, -S(O)2O−, -S(O)2NR1R2, -NR1C(O)R2, -NR1C(O)OR2, -NR1C(O)SR2, -NR1C(O)NR2R3, -P(O)2R1, -P(O)(OR1)2, -P(O)(OR1)O−, and -P(O)(O−)2, wherein the index n is an integer from 0 to 4, preferably from 0 to 1, most preferably 0; wherein two Ro on different A, B and C rings may combine to form a fused ring of five or more members; when the fused ring is six or more members, two Ro on different A, B and C rings may combine to form an organic linker optionally containing one or more heteroatoms; in one embodiment two Ro on different A, B and C rings combine to form a heteroatom bridge selected from -O- and -S- creating a six member fused ring; an Ro and Rm on the same ring or an Rm and Rp on the same ring may combine to form a fused aliphatic ring or fused aromatic ring either of which may contain heteroatoms; on at least one of the three rings A, B or C, preferably at least two, more preferably at least three, most preferably all four of the Ro and Rm groups are hydrogen, preferably all four Ro and Rm groups on at least two of the rings A, B and C are hydrogen; in some embodiments, all Ro and Rm groups on rings A, B and C are hydrogen; preferably each Rp is independently selected from hydrogen, -OR1 and -NR1R2; no more than two, preferably no more than one of Rp is hydrogen, preferably none are hydrogen; more preferably at least one, preferably two, most preferably all three Rp are -NR1R2; in some embodiments, one or even two of the Rings A, B and C may be replaced with an independently selected C3-C9 heteroaryl ring comprising one or two heteroatoms independently selected from O, S and N, optionally substituted with one or more independently selected R5 groups; G is independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, deuterium, C1-C16 alkoxide, phenoxide, bisphenoxide, nitrite, nitrile, alkyl amine, imidazole, arylamine, polyalkylene oxide, halides, alkylsulfide, aryl sulfide, or phosphine oxide; in one aspect the fraction [(deuterium)/(deuterium+hydrogen)] for G is at least 0.20, preferably at least 0.40, even more preferably at least 0.50 and most preferably at least 0.60 or even at least 0.80.
In the structures of Formula (II) and (III), wherein e and f are independently integers from 0 to 4; each R20 and R21 is independently selected from the group consisting of halogens, a nitro group, alkyl groups, substituted alkyl groups, -NC(O)OR1, -NC(O)SR1, -(CH2)n-O-R1, and -(CH2)n-NR1R2, wherein the index n is an integer from 0 to 4, preferably from 0 to 1, most preferably 0; each R25 is independently selected from the group consisting of monosaccharide moiety, disaccharide moiety, oligosaccharide moiety, and polysaccharide moiety, -C(O)R1, -C(O)OR1, -C(O)NR1R2; and each R22 and R23 is independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, alkyl groups, and substituted alkyl groups.
In the structure of Formula (IV), wherein R30 is positioned ortho or para to the bridging amine moiety and is selected from the group consisting of -OR38 and -NR36R37, each R36 and R37 is independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, alkyl groups, substituted alkyl groups, aryl groups, substituted aryl groups, acyl groups, R4, -C(O)OR1, -C(O)R1, and -C(O)NR1R2; R38 is selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, acyl groups, -C(O)OR1, -C(O)R1, and -C(O)NR1R2; g and h are independently integers from 0 to 4; each R31 and R32 is independently selected from the group consisting of alkyl groups, substituted alkyl groups, aryl groups, substituted aryl groups, alkaryl, substituted alkaryl, -(CH2)n-O-R1, -(CH2)n-NR1R2, -C(O)R1, -C(O)OR1, -C(O)O−, -C(O)NR1R2, -OC(O)R1, -OC(O)OR1, -OC(O)NR1R2, -S(O)2R1, -S(O)2OR1, -S(O)2O−, -S(O)2NR1R2, -NR1C(O)R2, -NR1C(O)OR2, -NR1C(O)SR2, -NR1C(O)NR2R3, -P(O)2R1, -P(O)(OR1)2, -P(O)(OR1)O−, and -P(O)(O−)2, wherein the index n is an integer from 0 to 4, preferably from 0 to 1, most preferably 0; -NR34R35 is positioned ortho or para to the bridging amine moiety and R34 and R35 are independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, alkyl, substituted alkyl, aryl, substituted aryl, alkaryl, substituted alkaryl, and R4; R33 is independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, -S(O)2R1, -C(O)N(H)R1; -C(O)OR1; and -C(O)R1; when g is 2 to 4, any two adjacent R31 groups may combine to form a fused ring of five or more members wherein no more than two of the atoms in the fused ring may be nitrogen atoms.
In the structure of Formula (V), X40 is selected from the group consisting of an oxygen atom, a sulfur atom, and NR45; R45 is independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, deuterium, alkyl, substituted alkyl, aryl, substituted aryl, alkaryl, substituted alkaryl, -S(O)2OH, -S(O)2O−, -C(O)OR1, -C(O)R1, and -C(O)NR1R2; R40 and R41 are independently selected from the group consisting of -(CH2)n-O-R1, -(CH2)n-NR1R2, wherein the index n is an integer from 0 to 4, preferably from 0 to 1, most preferably 0; j and k are independently integers from 0 to 3; R42 and R43 are independently selected from the group consisting of alkyl, substituted alkyl, aryl, substituted aryl, alkaryl, substituted alkaryl, -S(O)2R1, -C(O)NR1R2, -NC(O)OR1, -NC(O)SR1, -C(O)OR1, -C(O)R1, -(CH2)n-O-R1, -(CH2)n-NR1R2, wherein the index n is an integer from 0 to 4, preferably from 0 to 1, most preferably 0; R44 is -C(O)R1, -C(O)NR1R2, and -C(O)OR1.
In the structures of Formula (1)-(V), wherein any charge present in any of the preceding groups is balanced with a suitable independently selected internal or external counterion. Suitable independently selected external counterions may be cationic or anionic. Examples of suitable cations include but are not limited to one or more metals preferably selected from Group I and Group II, the most preferred of these being Na, K, Mg, and Ca, or an organic cation such as iminium, ammonium, and phosphonium. Examples of suitable anions include but are not limited to: fluoride, chloride, bromide, iodide, perchlorate, hydrogen sulfate, sulfate, aminosulfate, nitrate, dihydrogen phosphate, hydrogen phosphate, phosphate, bicarbonate, carbonate, methosulfate, ethosulfate, cyanate, thiocyanate, tetrachlorozincate, borate, tetrafluoroborate, acetate, chloroacetate, cyanoacetate, hydroxyacetate, aminoacetate, methylaminoacetate, di- and tri-chloroacetate, 2-chloro-propionate, 2-hydroxypropionate, glycolate, thioglycolate, thioacetate, phenoxyacetate, trimethylacetate, valerate, palmitate, acrylate, oxalate, malonate, crotonate, succinate, citrate, methylene-bis-thioglycolate, ethylene-bis-iminoacetate, nitrilotriacetate, fumarate, maleate, benzoate, methylbenzoate, chlorobenzoate, dichlorobenzoate, hydroxybenzoate, aminobenzoate, phthalate, terephthalate, indolylacetate, chlorobenzenesulfonate, benzenesulfonate, toluenesulfonate, biphenyl-sulfonate and chlorotoluenesulfonate. Those of ordinary skill in the art are well aware of different counterions which can be used in place of those listed above.
In the structures of Formula (I)-(V), R1, R2, R3, and R15 are independently selected from the group consisting of hydrogen, alkyl, substituted alkyl, aryl, substituted aryl, alkaryl, substituted alkaryl, and R4; wherein R4 is a organic group composed of one or more organic monomers with said monomer molecular weights ranging from 28 to 500, preferably 43 to 350, even more preferably 43 to 250, wherein the organic group may be substituted with one or more additional leuco colorant moieties conforming to the structure of Formula I-V. In one aspect, R4 is selected from the group consisting of alkyleneoxy (polyether), oxoalkyleneoxy (polyesters), oxoalkyleneamine (polyamides), epichlorohydrin, quaternized epichlorohydrin, alkyleneamine, hydroxyalkylene, acyloxyalkylene, carboxyalkylene, carboalkoxyalkylene, and sugar. Where any leuco moiety comprising an R4 group with three or more contiguous monomers, that leuco moiety is defined herein as a “polymeric leuco moiety”. One skilled in the art knows that the properties of a compound with regard to any of a number of characteristic attributes such as solubility, partitioning, deposition, removal, staining, etc., are related to the placement, identity and number of such contiguous monomers incorporated therein. The skilled artisan can therefore adjust the placement, identity and number of such contiguous monomers to alter any particular attribute in a more or less predictable fashion.
As noted above, the reactive leuco compound(s) present in the leuco composition comprise at least one reactive moiety covalently bound to the leuco moiety. The reactive moiety can be any suitable electrophilic moiety. Suitable electrophilic moieties are those that are sufficiently electrophilic to react with an organic nucleophilic moiety having a resonance structure (contributing structure) in which a lone pair of electrons or a negative charge resides on a carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, or phosphorus atom within the moiety. Upon reacting, the reactive moiety creates a covalent bond between the leuco moiety and the compound containing the organic nucleophilic moiety. Preferably, the reactive moiety is sufficiently electrophilic to react with a nucleophilic moiety selected from the group consisting of a hydroxy group, a sulfhydryl group, a cyano group, alkoxy groups, amine groups (primary, secondary, or tertiary amines), carbanions, carboxyl groups, thiocarboxylate groups, thiolate groups, and thiocyanate groups. In another preferred embodiment, the reactive moiety is sufficiently electrophilic to react with a nucleophilic moiety selected from the group consisting of a hydroxy group, a sulfhydryl group, and amine groups.
Suitable reactive moieties include, but are not limited to, those moieties which react with an amine to form a carbamate, a urea, an amide, a sulfonamide, or a higher order amine (such as secondary amine from a primary amine, or a tertiary amine from a secondary amine, via alkylation). Suitable reactive moieties also include, but are not limited to, those moieties which react with an alcohol to form carbonates, carbamates, carboxylic acid esters, sulfonic acid esters, or ethers. Suitable reactive moieties also include, but are not limited to, those moieties which react with a sulfhydryl (thiol) to form thiocarbonates, thiocarbamates, and the like. Suitable reactive moieties include, but are not limited to, those illustrated below:
In the structures above, the index n is 0 or 1. When n is 1, reaction of the above groups with an amine forms a carbamate, and reaction with an alcohol forms a carbonate. When n is 0, the product of reaction with an amine is a carboxylic acid amide, and the product of reaction with an alcohol is a carboxylic acid ester. Similar groups suitable for the formation of sulfonic acid esters and amides are well known to those skilled in the art. In like manner, alkyl halides and alkyl tosylates are representative of reactive groups that may react with an amine to form a higher order amine, or with an alcohol to form an ether.
In addition to the more traditional groups that may be used as reactive moieties, any of the many specialized electrophilic moieties that have been employed as anchoring groups for reactive dyes may be profitably employed. Reactive dyes consist of a dye chromophore covalently bound to a reactive moiety. These reactive moieties react with nucleophilic moieties (e.g., primary and secondary amines) to form a covalent bound, preferably by a substitution or addition reaction.
Reactive moieties of this sort are preferably selected from heterocyclic reactive moieties and a sulfooxyethylsulfonyl reactive group (-SO2CH2CH2OSO3Na). The heterocyclic reactive moieties are preferably nitrogen contains aromatic rings bound to a halogen or an ammonium m, which react with nucleophilic moieties (e.g., primary amines and second amines) of another compound to form a covalent bond. These heterocyclic reactive moieties preferably contain a halogen, such as chlorine or fluorine. In a preferred embodiment, the reactive moiety preferably is selected from the group consisting of sulfooxyethylsulfonyl moieties, vinylsulfonyl moieties, halotriazinyl moieties, quaternary ammoniumtriazinyl moieties, halopyrimidinyl moieties, halopyridazinyl moieties, haloquinoxalinyl moieties, halophthalazinyl moieties, bromoacrlyamidyl moieties, and benzothiazolyl moieties. More preferred heterocylic reactive moieties are dichlorotriazinyl, difluorochloropyrimi-dine, monofluorotrazinyl, monofluorochlorotrazinyl, dichloroquinoxaline, difluorotriazine, monochlorotriazinyl, and trichloropyrimidine.
Especially preferred heterocylic reactive moieties are:
wherein R1 is selected from H or alkyl, preferably H; X is selected from F or Cl; when X═Cl, Z1 is selected from -Cl, -NR2R3, -OR2, -SO3Na; when X═F, Z1 is selected from -NR2R3 wherein R2 and R3 are independently selected from H, alkyl and aryl groups. Aryl groups are preferably phenyl and are preferably substituted by -SO3Na or -SO2CH2CH2OSO3Na. Alkyl groups are preferably methyl or ethyl. The phenyl groups may be further substituted with suitable uncharged organic groups, preferably with a molecular weight lower than 200. Preferred groups include -CH3, -C2H5, and -OCH3. The alkyl groups may be further substituted with suitable uncharged organic groups, preferably with a molecular weight lower than 200. Preferred groups include -CH3, -C2H5, -OH, -OCH3, -OC2H4OH. Most preferred heterocylic reactive moieties are selected from:
wherein m=1 or 2, preferably 1.
In another aspect, the reactive moiety is selected from the group consisting of:
wherein R3 is -OSO3X, -OSO3−, or -Cl. R4 and R5 are independently selected from -Cl and -Br; R1 and R2 are independently selected from -Cl, -F, and the radical selected from:
where R10 is selected from H, -CO2X where X is hydrogen or a cation of an alkali or alkaline earth metal or an ammonium.
In the reactive leuco compound, the reactive moiety can be directly bound to the leuco moiety or the two can be connected by any suitable linking moiety. Suitable linking moieties include, but are not limited to, oxygen, an amine, and alkanediyl moieties. Suitable alkanediyl moieties include, but are not limited to, branched and unbranched C1-C8 alkanediyl moieties, more preferably branched and unbranched C1-C4 alkanediyl groups (e.g., an ethane-1,2-diyl moiety).
Suitable reactive leuco compounds include, but are not limited to, derivatives of cyanuric chloride (2,4,6-trichloro-1,3,5-triazine [108-77-0]), a molecule of wide synthetic potential because the three chlorine atoms on the triazine ring differ in their reactivities. The first chlorine atom exchanges with nucleophiles in water at 0-5° C., the second at 35-40° C., and the third at 80-85° C. A wide variety of triazinyl based leuco compounds can thus be prepared by careful selection of the reaction conditions. Condensation of cyanuric chloride with a leuco compound (“leuco” in the structures that following) containing an amino group (the amino group may be linked directly to the leuco compound or via a bridging moiety) yields the highly reactive dichlorotriazinyl compounds 1. These very reactive leuco compounds are sensitive to hydrolysis, and a suitable buffer can be added to increase its stability.
When two of the chlorine atoms are substituted, for example with amino or alkoxyl groups, monochlorotriazinyl leuco compounds 2 are obtained (where X═-NR2, -NHR, -OR, or -SR). These are considerably less reactive, and hence react with cellulose or other molecules comprising nucleophilic moieties (such as -OH, -SH and amines) only at relatively high temperature (for example, 80° C.).
The reactivity of monochlorotriazinyl leuco compounds can be increased by replacing chlorine with fluorine (3), which allows the process to be carried out at lower temperatures, such as 40° C.
Reaction of monochlorotriazinyl leuco compounds with tertiary amines also yields highly reactive leuco compounds 4. One advantage conferred by the ammonium groups in these compounds is increased water solubility.
The reactivity of compounds of this type is strongly influenced by the choice of tertiary amine. Nicotinic acid is preferred because it acts as a good leaving group and introduces comparatively little odor to compositions containing the compound. The ammonium residue is also a better leaving group than, for example, chlorine, and allows the attachment process to be conducted at 40-60° C. In contrast to halogen-containing triazinyl leuco compounds, these leuco compounds do not require alkali in the application process, so attachment can be conducted under neutral conditions.
In addition to the 1,3,5-triazines, other classes of heterocycles are important as reactive moieties. Especially noteworthy are the halopyrimidine-based leuco compounds 5.
These compounds are less reactive than the triazines because the extra carbon atom reduces the ability of the ring to stabilize a negative charge. The reactivity of the system can be increased by introducing strongly electron withdrawing groups, including cyano, fluoro, or methylsulfonyl groups. The pyrimidine ring can also be activated by inserting a carbonyl group between the leuco moiety and the heterocycle (6).
Other diazine moieties can also be incorporated into reactive leuco compounds, e.g., 7 and 8:
The list of economically attractive reactive heterocyclic intermediates also includes dichloroquinoxalines 9 and dichlorophthalazines 10. Reactive moieties in both cases are bound to the leuco moiety via a carbonylamino group, and the reactivities correspond roughly to those of dichlorotriazinyl-based compounds.
Benzothiazole derivatives with good leaving groups at the 2-position of the heterocycle can also be used as reactive moieties. An example of such a reactive leuco compound with chlorine as the leaving group is 11.
The reactive moiety that has had the greatest impact on the market is the 2-sulfooxyethylsulfonyl group. Treatment with alkali in this case causes the elimination of sulfuric acid to form a vinylsulfonyl moiety that reacts with desired nucleophiles to provide a bond. Describing this as an elimination-addition sequence is not meant to rule out the possibility that the nucleophile attacks the -carbon atom directly, without intervention of a vinyl intermediate. Reactive vinylsulfones are also prepared from 2-chloroethylsulfonyl derivatives, which lead to the desired intermediates by elimination of hydrogen chloride:
Numerous derivatives of ethylsulfonyl and vinylsulfonyl groups have also been prepared in recent years, and such derivatives are also believed to be suitable reactive moieties for the reactive leuco compounds described herein.
In one aspect, the reactive leuco compound comprises more than one reactive moiety, preferably two or three. In such embodiments, the reactive moieties can be the same or different. One example of a reactive leuco compound containing multiple different reactive moieties is a compound in which cyanuric chloride is bound to an amine with two aliphatic 2-chloroethylsulfonyl chains (16):
The leuco composition of the invention can contain the colored form of any reactive leuco compound(s) present in the leuco composition. In a preferred embodiment, the ratio of the amount of the reactive leuco compound present in the leuco composition to the amount of a colored form of the reactive leuco compound present in the leuco composition is about 1:9 or more. More preferably, the ratio of the amount of the reactive leuco compound present in the composition to the amount of a colored form of the reactive leuco compound present in the leuco composition is about 1:4 or more, about 1:3 or more, about 3:7 or more, about 2:3 or more, about 1:1 or more, about 3:2 or more, about 7:3 or more, about 3:1 or more, about 4:1 or more, or about 9:1 or more.
The leuco compounds described above are believed to be suitable for use in the treatment of textile materials, such as in domestic laundering processes. In particular, it is believed that the leuco compounds will deposit onto the fibers of the textile material due to the nature of the leuco compound. Further, once deposited onto the textile material, the leuco compound can be converted to a colored compound through the application of the appropriate chemical or physical triggers that will convert the leuco compound to its colored form. For example, the leuco compound can be converted to its colored form upon oxidation of the leuco compound to the oxidized compound. By selecting the proper leuco moiety, the leuco compound can be designed to impart a desired hue to the textile material as the leuco compound is converted to its colored form. For example, a leuco compound that exhibits a blue hue upon conversion to its colored form can be used to counteract the yellowing of the textile material to normally occurs due to the passage of time and/or repeated launderings. Thus, in other embodiments, the invention provides laundry care compositions comprising the above-described leuco compound and domestic methods for treating a textile material (e.g., methods for washing an article of laundry or clothing).
Preferably the leuco compound gives a hue to the cloth with a relative hue angle of 210 to 345, or even a relative hue angle of 240 to 320, or even a relative hue angle of 250 to 300 (e.g., 250 to 290). The relative hue angle can be determined by any suitable method as known in the art. However, preferably it may be determined as described in further detail herein with respect to deposition of the leuco entity on cotton relative to cotton absent any leuco entity.
In one embodiment, the invention provides a leuco composition comprising a hydrolyzed reactive leuco compound. The hydrolyzed reactive leuco compound can be any compound obtainable by reaction of a reactive leuco compound described above and water. In a preferred embodiment, the electrophilic moiety has been hydrolyzed to a moiety selected from the group consisting of heteroaromatic moieties having at least one hydroxy group covalently bound thereto and -SO2CH2CH2OH.
In one embodiment, the invention provides a leuco composition that is produced by reacting a leuco composition and/or reactive leuco compound as described above with an organic compound comprising a nucleophilic moiety. Suitable nucleophilic moieties include, but are not limited to, primary amine groups, secondary amine groups, hydroxy groups, and sulfhydryl groups. The organic compound can be any suitable compound comprising a nucleophilic moiety. For example, the organic compound can be a polymer or any laundry care ingredient described below that contains one or more nucleophilic moieties. In certain embodiments, this leuco composition can be combined with the hydrolyzed leuco composition described above to yield another leuco composition.
The amount of reactive leuco compound(s), hydrolyzed reactive leuco compound(s), and/or product of a reactive leuco compound with an organic compound comprising a nucleophilic moiety, all of which will simply be referred to here and in the paragraph below as reactive leuco compound(s), used in the laundry care compositions of the present invention may be any level suitable to achieve the aims of the invention. In one aspect, the laundry care composition comprises reactive leuco compound in an amount from about 0.0001 wt % to about 1.0 wt %, preferably from 0.0005 wt % to about 0.5 wt %, even more preferably from about 0.0008 wt % to about 0.2 wt %, most preferably from 0.004 wt % to about 0.1 wt %.
In another aspect, the laundry care composition comprises reactive leuco compound in an amount from 0.0025 to 5.0 milliequivalents/kg, preferably from 0.005 to 2.5 milliequivalents/kg, even more preferably from 0.01 to 1.0 milliequivalents/kg, most preferably from 0.05 to 0.50 milliequivalents/kg, wherein the units of milliequivalents/kg refer to the milliequivalents of leuco moiety per kg of the laundry composition. For reactive leuco compound comprising more than one leuco moiety, the number of milliequivalents is related to the number of millimoles of the reactive leuco compound by the following equation: (millimoles of reactive leuco compound)×(no. of milliequivalents of leuco moiety/millimole of reactive leuco compound)=milliequivalents of leuco moiety. In instances where there is only a single leuco moiety per reactive leuco compound, the number of milliequivalents/kg will be equal to the number of millimoles of reactive leuco compound/kg of the laundry care composition.
As noted above, in a second embodiment, the invention provides a laundry care composition comprising a laundry care ingredient and a leuco composition as described herein. The laundry care composition can comprise any suitable leuco composition or combination of leuco compositions as described herein. The laundry care composition can comprise any suitable laundry care ingredient. Laundry care ingredients suitable for use in the invention are described in detail below.
Laundry Care Ingredients
Surfactant System
The products of the present invention may comprise from about 0.00 wt %, more typically from about 0.10 to 80% by weight of a surfactant. In one aspect, such compositions may comprise from about 5% to 50% by weight of surfactant. Surfactants utilized can be of the anionic, nonionic, amphoteric, ampholytic, zwitterionic, or cationic type or can comprise compatible mixtures of these types. Anionic and nonionic surfactants are typically employed if the fabric care product is a laundry detergent. On the other hand, cationic surfactants are typically employed if the fabric care product is a fabric softener.
Anionic Surfactant
Useful anionic surfactants can themselves be of several different types. For example, water-soluble salts of the higher fatty acids, i.e., “soaps”, are useful anionic surfactants in the compositions herein. This includes alkali metal soaps such as the sodium, potassium, ammonium, and alkylolammonium salts of higher fatty acids containing from about 8 to about 24 carbon atoms, or even from about 12 to about 18 carbon atoms. Soaps can be made by direct saponification of fats and oils or by the neutralization of free fatty acids. Particularly useful are the sodium and potassium salts of the mixtures of fatty acids derived from coconut oil and tallow, i.e., sodium or potassium tallow and coconut soap.
Preferred alkyl sulphates are C8-18 alkyl alkoxylated sulphates, preferably a C12-15 alkyl or hydroxyalkyl alkoxylated sulphates. Preferably the alkoxylating group is an ethoxylating group. Typically the alkyl alkoxylated sulphate has an average degree of alkoxylation from 0.5 to 30 or 20, or from 0.5 to 10. The alkyl group may be branched or linear. The alkoxylated alkyl sulfate surfactant may be a mixture of alkoxylated alkyl sulfates, the mixture having an average (arithmetic mean) carbon chain length within the range of about 12 to about 30 carbon atoms, or an average carbon chain length of about 12 to about 15 carbon atoms, and an average (arithmetic mean) degree of alkoxylation of from about 1 mol to about 4 mols of ethylene oxide, propylene oxide, or mixtures thereof, or an average (arithmetic mean) degree of alkoxylation of about 1.8 mols of ethylene oxide, propylene oxide, or mixtures thereof. The alkoxylated alkyl sulfate surfactant may have a carbon chain length from about 10 carbon atoms to about 18 carbon atoms, and a degree of alkoxylation of from about 0.1 to about 6 mols of ethylene oxide, propylene oxide, or mixtures thereof. The alkoxylated alkyl sulfate may be alkoxylated with ethylene oxide, propylene oxide, or mixtures thereof. Alkyl ether sulfate surfactants may contain a peaked ethoxylate distribution. Specific example include C12-C15 EO 2.5 Sulfate, C14-C15 EO 2.5 Sulfate and C12-C15 EO 1.5 Sulfate derived from NEODOL® alcohols from Shell and C12-C14 EO3 Sulfate, C12-C16 EO3 Sulfate, C12-C14 EO2 Sulfate and C12-C14 EO1 Sulfate derived from natural alcohols from Huntsman. The AES may be linear, branched, or combinations thereof. The alkyl group may be derived from synthetic or natural alcohols such as those supplied by the tradename Neodol® by Shell, Safol®, Lial®, and Isalchem® by Sasol or midcut alcohols derived from vegetable oils such as coconut and palm kernel. Another suitable anionic detersive surfactant is alkyl ether carboxylate, comprising a C10-C26 linear or branched, preferably C10-C20 linear, most preferably C16-C18 linear alkyl alcohol and from 2 to 20, preferably 7 to 13, more preferably 8 to 12, most preferably 9.5 to 10.5 ethoxylates. The acid form or salt form, such as sodium or ammonium salt, may be used, and the alkyl chain may contain one cis or trans double bond. Alkyl ether carboxylic acids are available from Kao (Akypo®), Huntsman (Empicol®) and Clariant (Emulsogen®).
Other useful anionic surfactants can include the alkali metal salts of alkyl benzene sulfonates, in which the alkyl group contains from about 9 to about 15 carbon atoms, in straight chain (linear) or branched chain configuration. In some examples, the alkyl group is linear. Such linear alkylbenzene sulfonates are known as “LAS.” In other examples, the linear alkylbenzene sulfonate may have an average number of carbon atoms in the alkyl group of from about 11 to 14. In a specific example, the linear straight chain alkylbenzene sulfonates may have an average number of carbon atoms in the alkyl group of about 11.8 carbon atoms, which may be abbreviated as C11.8 LAS. Preferred sulphonates are C10-13 alkyl benzene sulphonate. Suitable alkyl benzene sulphonate (LAS) may be obtained, by sulphonating commercially available linear alkyl benzene (LAB); suitable LAB includes low 2-phenyl LAB, such as those supplied by Sasol under the tradename Isochem® or those supplied by Petresa under the tradename Petrelab®, other suitable LAB include high 2-phenyl LAB, such as those supplied by Sasol under the tradename Hyblene®. A suitable anionic detersive surfactant is alkyl benzene sulphonate that is obtained by DETAL catalyzed process, although other synthesis routes, such as HF, may also be suitable. In one aspect a magnesium salt of LAS is used. Suitable anionic sulfonate surfactants for use herein include water-soluble salts of C8-C18 alkyl or hydroxyalkyl sulfonates; C11-C18 alkyl benzene sulfonates (LAS), modified alkylbenzene sulfonate (MLAS) as discussed in WO 99/05243, WO 99/05242, WO 99/05244, WO 99/05082, WO 99/05084, WO 99/05241, WO 99/07656, WO 00/23549, and WO 00/23548; methyl ester sulfonate (MES); and alpha-olefin sulfonate (AOS). Those also include the paraffin sulfonates may be monosulfonates and/or disulfonates, obtained by sulfonating paraffins of 10 to 20 carbon atoms. The sulfonate surfactant may also include the alkyl glyceryl sulfonate surfactants.
Anionic surfactants of the present invention may exist in an acid form, and said acid form may be neutralized to form a surfactant salt which is desirable for use in the present detergent compositions. Typical agents for neutralization include the metal counterion base such as hydroxides, e.g., NaOH or KOH. Further preferred agents for neutralizing anionic surfactants of the present invention and adjunct anionic surfactants or cosurfactants in their acid forms include ammonia, amines, or alkanolamines. Alkanolamines are preferred. Suitable non-limiting examples including monoethanolamine, diethanolamine, triethanolamine, and other linear or branched alkanolamines known in the art; for example, highly preferred alkanolamines include 2-amino-1-propanol, 1-aminopropanol, monoisopropanolamine, or 1-amino-3-propanol.
Nonionic Surfactant
Preferably the composition comprises a nonionic detersive surfactant. Suitable nonionic surfactants include alkoxylated fatty alcohols. The nonionic surfactant may be selected from ethoxylated alcohols and ethoxylated alkyl phenols of the formula R(OC2H4),OH, wherein R is selected from the group consisting of aliphatic hydrocarbon radicals containing from about 8 to about 15 carbon atoms and alkyl phenyl radicals in which the alkyl groups contain from about 8 to about 12 carbon atoms, and the average value of n is from about 5 to about 15. Other non-limiting examples of nonionic surfactants useful herein include: C8-C18 alkyl ethoxylates, such as, NEODOL® nonionic surfactants from Shell; C6-C12 alkyl phenol alkoxylates where the alkoxylate units may be ethyleneoxy units, propyleneoxy units, or a mixture thereof; C12-C18 alcohol and C6-C12 alkyl phenol condensates with ethylene oxide/propylene oxide block polymers such as Pluronic® from BASF; C14-C22 mid-chain branched alcohols, BA; C14-C22 mid-chain branched alkyl alkoxylates, BAEX, wherein x is from 1 to 30; alkylpolysaccharides; specifically alkylpolyglycosides; polyhydroxy fatty acid amides; and ether capped poly(oxyalkylated) alcohol surfactants. Specific example include C12-C15 EO7 and C14-C15 EO7 NEODOL® nonionic surfactants from Shell, C12-C14 EO7 and C12-C14 EO9 Surfonic® nonionic surfactants from Huntsman.
Highly preferred nonionic surfactants are the condensation products of Guerbet alcohols with from 2 to 18 moles, preferably 2 to 15, more preferably 5-9 of ethylene oxide per mole of alcohol. Suitable nonionic surfactants include those with the trade name Lutensol® from BASF. Lutensol XP-50 is a Guerbet ethoxylate that contains an average of about 5 ethoxy groups. Lutensol XP-80 and containing an average of about 8 ethoxy groups. Other suitable non-ionic surfactants for use herein include fatty alcohol polyglycol ethers, alkylpolyglucosides and fatty acid glucamides, alkylpolyglucosides based on Guerbet alcohols.
Amphoteric Surfactant
The surfactant system may include amphoteric surfactant, such as amine oxide. Preferred amine oxides are alkyl dimethyl amine oxide or alkyl amido propyl dimethyl amine oxide, more preferably alkyl dimethyl amine oxide and especially coco dimethyl amino oxide. Amine oxide may have a linear or mid-branched alkyl moiety.
Ampholytic Surfactants
The surfactant system may comprise an ampholytic surfactant. Specific, non-limiting examples of ampholytic surfactants include: aliphatic derivatives of secondary or tertiary amines, or aliphatic derivatives of heterocyclic secondary and tertiary amines in which the aliphatic radical can be straight- or branched-chain. One of the aliphatic substituents may contain at least about 8 carbon atoms, for example from about 8 to about 18 carbon atoms, and at least one contains an anionic water-solubilizing group, e.g. carboxy, sulfonate, sulfate. See U.S. Pat. No. 3,929,678 at column 19, lines 18-35, for suitable examples of ampholytic surfactants.
Zwitterionic Surfactant
Zwitterionic surfactants are known in the art, and generally include surfactants which are neutrally charged overall, but carry at least one positive charged atom/group and at least one negatively charged atom/group. Examples of zwitterionic surfactants include: derivatives of secondary and tertiary amines, derivatives of heterocyclic secondary and tertiary amines, or derivatives of quaternary ammonium, quaternary phosphonium or tertiary sulfonium compounds. See U.S. Pat. No. 3,929,678 at column 19, line 38 through column 22, line 48, for examples of zwitterionic surfactants; betaines, including alkyl dimethyl betaine and cocodimethyl amidopropyl betaine, C8 to C18 (for example from C12 to C18) amine oxides and sulfo and hydroxy betaines, such as N-alkyl-N,N-dimethylamino-1-propane sulfonate where the alkyl group can be C8 to C18 and in certain embodiments from C10 to C14. A preferred zwitterionic surfactant for use in the present invention is the cocoamidopropyl betaine.
Cationic Surfactants
Examples of cationic surfactants include quaternary ammonium surfactants, which can have up to 26 carbon atoms specific. Additional examples include a) alkoxylate quaternary ammonium (AQA) surfactants as discussed in U.S. Pat. No. 6,136,769; b) dimethyl hydroxyethyl quaternary ammonium as discussed in U.S. Pat. No. 6,004,922; c) polyamine cationic surfactants as discussed in WO 98/35002, WO 98/35003, WO 98/35004, WO 98/35005, and WO 98/35006, which is herein incorporated by reference; d) cationic ester surfactants as discussed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4,228,042, 4,239,660 4,260,529 and U.S. Pat. No. 6,022,844, which is herein incorporated by reference; and e) amino surfactants as discussed in U.S. Pat. No. 6,221,825 and WO 00/47708, which is herein incorporated by reference, and specifically amido propyldimethyl amine (APA). Useful cationic surfactants also include those described in U.S. Pat. No. 4,222,905, Cockrell, issued Sep. 16, 1980, and in U.S. Pat. No. 4,239,659, Murphy, issued Dec. 16, 1980, both of which are also incorporated herein by reference. Quaternary ammonium compounds may be present in fabric enhancer compositions, such as fabric softeners, and comprise quaternary ammonium cations that are positively charged polyatomic ions of the structure NR4+, where R is an alkyl group or an aryl group.
Adjunct Cleaning Additives
The cleaning compositions of the invention may also contain adjunct cleaning additives. The precise nature of the cleaning adjunct additives and levels of incorporation thereof will depend on the physical form of the cleaning composition, and the precise nature of the cleaning operation for which it is to be used.
The adjunct cleaning additives may be selected from the group consisting of builders, structurants or thickeners, clay soil removal/anti-redeposition agents, polymeric soil release agents, polymeric dispersing agents, polymeric grease cleaning agents, enzymes, enzyme stabilizing systems, bleaching compounds, bleaching agents, bleach activators, bleach catalysts, brighteners, dyes, hueing agents, dye transfer inhibiting agents, chelating agents, suds supressors, softeners, and perfumes. This listing of adjunct cleaning additives is exemplary only, and not by way of limitation of the types of adjunct cleaning additives which can be used. In principle, any adjunct cleaning additive known in the art may be used in the instant invention.
Polymers
The composition may comprise one or more polymers. Non-limiting examples, all of which may be optionally modified, include polyethyleneimines, carboxymethylcellulose, poly(vinyl-pyrrolidone), poly (ethylene glycol), poly(vinyl alcohol), poly(vinylpyridine-N-oxide), poly(vinylimidazole), polycarboxylates or alkoxylated substituted phenols (ASP). as described in WO 2016/041676. An example of ASP dispersants, include but are not limited to, HOSTAPAL BV CONC S1000 available from Clariant.
Polyamines may be used for grease, particulate removal or stain removal. A wide variety of amines and polyaklyeneimines can be alkoxylated to various degrees to achieve hydrophobic or hydrophilic cleaning. Such compounds may include, but are not limited to, ethoxylated polyethyleneimine, ethoxylated hexamethylene diamine, and sulfated versions thereof. Useful examples of such polymers are HP20 available from BASF or a polymer having the following general structure:
bis((C2H5O) (C2H4O)n)(CH3)-N+-CxH2x-N+-(CH3)-bis((C2H5O)(C2H4O)n), wherein n=from 20 to 30, and x=from 3 to 8, or sulphated or sulphonated variants thereof. Polypropoxylated-polyethoxylated amphiphilic polyethyleneimine derivatives may also be included to achieve greater grease removal and emulsification. These may comprise alkoxylated polyalkylenimines, preferably having an inner polyethylene oxide block and an outer polypropylene oxide block. Detergent compositions may also contain unmodified polyethyleneimines useful for enhanced beverage stain removal. PEI's of various molecular weights are commercially available from the BASF Corporation under the trade name Lupasol® Examples of suitable PEI's include, but are not limited to, Lupasol FG®, Lupasol G-35®.
The composition may comprise one or more carboxylate polymers, such as a maleate/acrylate random copolymer or polyacrylate homopolymer useful as polymeric dispersing agents. Alkoxylated polycarboxylates such as those prepared from polyacrylates are also useful to provide clay dispersancy. Such materials are described in WO 91/08281. Chemically, these materials comprise polyacrylates having one ethoxy side-chain per every 7-8 acrylate units. The side-chains are of the formula -(CH2CH2O)m (CH2)nCH3 wherein m is 2-3 and n is 6-12. The side-chains are ester or ether-linked to the polyacrylate “backbone” to provide a “comb” polymer type structure.
Preferred amphiphilic graft co-polymer(s) comprise (i) polyethyelene glycol backbone; and (ii) at least one pendant moiety selected from polyvinyl acetate, polyvinyl alcohol and mixtures thereof. An example of an amphiphilic graft co-polymer is Sokalan HP22, supplied from BASF.
Alkoxylated substituted phenols as described in WO 2016/041676 are also suitable examples of polymers that provide clay dispersancy. Hostapal BV Conc S1000, available from Clariant, is one non-limiting example of an ASP dispersant.
Preferably the composition comprises one or more soil release polymers. Suitable soil release polymers are polyester soil release polymers such as Repel-o-tex polymers, including Repel-o-tex SF, SF-2 and SRP6 supplied by Rhodia. Other suitable soil release polymers include Texcare polymers, including Texcare SRA100, SRA300, SRN100, SRN170, SRN240, SRN260 SRN300 and SRN325 supplied by Clariant. Other suitable soil release polymers are Marloquest polymers, such as Marloquest SL, HSCB, L235M, B, G82 supplied by Sasol. Other suitable soil release polymers include methyl-capped ethoxylated propoxylated soil release polymers as described in U.S. Pat. No. 9,365,806.
Preferably the composition comprises one or more polysaccharides which may in particular be chosen from carboxymethyl cellulose, methylcarboxymethylcellulose, sulfoethylcellulose, methylhydroxyethylcellulose, carboxymethyl xyloglucan, carboxymethyl xylan, sulfoethylgalactomannan, carboxymethyl galactomannan, hydroxyethyl galactomannan, sulfoethyl starch, carboxymethyl starch, and mixture thereof. Other polysaccharides suitable for use in the present invention are the glucans. Preferred glucans are Poly alpha-1,3-glucan which is a polymer comprising glucose monomeric units linked together by glycosidic linkages (i.e., glucosidic linkages), wherein at least about 50% of the glycosidic linkages are alpha-1,3-glycosidic linkages. Poly alpha-1,3-glucan is a type of polysaccharide. Poly alpha-1,3-glucan can be enzymatically produced from sucrose using one or more glucosyltransferase enzymes, such as described in U.S. Pat. No. 7,000,000, and U.S. Patent Appl. Publ. Nos. 2013/0244288 and 2013/0244287 (all of which are incorporated herein by reference), for example.
Other suitable polysaccharides for use in the composition are cationic polysaccharides. Examples of cationic polysaccharides include cationic guar gum derivatives, quaternary nitrogen-containing cellulose ethers, and synthetic polymers that are copolymers of etherified cellulose, guar and starch. When used, the cationic polymers herein are either soluble in the composition or are soluble in a complex coacervate phase in the composition formed by the cationic polymer and the anionic, amphoteric and/or zwitterionic surfactant component described hereinbefore. Suitable cationic polymers are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 3,962,418; 3,958,581; and U.S. Publication No. 2007/0207109A1.
Polymers can also function as deposition aids for other detergent raw materials. Preferred deposition aids are selected from the group consisting of cationic and nonionic polymers. Suitable polymers include cationic starches, cationic hydroxyethylcellulose, polyvinylformaldehyde, locust bean gum, mannans, xyloglucans, tamarind gum, polyethyleneterephthalate and polymers containing dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate, optionally with one or more monomers selected from the group comprising acrylic acid and acrylamide.
Additional Amines
Polyamines are known to improve grease removal. Preferred cyclic and linear amines for performance are 1,3-bis (methylamine)-cyclohexane, 4-methylcyclohexane-1,3-diamine (Baxxodur ECX 210 supplied by BASF) 1,3 propane diamine, 1,6 hexane diamine, 1,3 pentane diamine (Dytek EP supplied by Invista), 2-methyl 1,5 pentane diamine (Dytek A supplied by Invista). U.S. Pat. No. 6,710,023 discloses hand dishwashing compositions containing said diamines and polyamines containing at least 3 protonable amines. Polyamines according to the invention have at least one pka above the wash pH and at least two pka's greater than about 6 and below the wash pH. Preferred polyamines with are selected from the group consisting of tetraethylenepentamine, hexaethylhexamine, heptaethylheptamines, octaethyloctamines, nonethylnonamines, and mixtures thereof commercially available from Dow, BASF and Huntman. Especially preferred polyetheramines are lipophilic modified as described in U.S. Pat. No. 9,752,101, U.S. Pat. No. 9,487,739, U.S. Pat. No. 9,631,163
Dye Transfer Inhibitor (DTI)
The composition may comprise one or more dye transfer inhibiting agents. In one embodiment of the invention the inventors have surprisingly found that compositions comprising polymeric dye transfer inhibiting agents in addition to the specified dye give improved performance. This is surprising because these polymers prevent dye deposition. Suitable dye transfer inhibitors include, but are not limited to, polyvinylpyrrolidone polymers, polyamine N-oxide polymers, copolymers of N-vinylpyrrolidone and N-vinylimidazole, polyvinyloxazolidones and polyvinylimidazoles or mixtures thereof. Suitable examples include PVP-K15, PVP-K30, ChromaBond S-400, ChromaBond S-403E and Chromabond S-100 from Ashland Aqualon, and Sokalan HP165, Sokalan HP50, Sokalan HP53, Sokalan HP59, Sokalan® HP 56K, Sokalan® HP 66 from BASF. Other suitable DTIs are as described in WO2012/004134. When present in a subject composition, the dye transfer inhibiting agents may be present at levels from about 0.0001% to about 10%, from about 0.01% to about 5% or even from about 0.1% to about 3% by weight of the composition.
Enzymes
Enzymes may be included in the cleaning compositions for a variety of purposes, including removal of protein-based, carbohydrate-based, or triglyceride-based stains from substrates, for the prevention of refugee dye transfer in fabric laundering, and for fabric restoration. Suitable enzymes include proteases, amylases, lipases, carbohydrases, cellulases, oxidases, peroxidases, mannanases, and mixtures thereof of any suitable origin, such as vegetable, animal, bacterial, fungal, and yeast origin. Other enzymes that may be used in the cleaning compositions described herein include hemicellulases, peroxidases, proteases, cellulases, endoglucanases, xylanases, lipases, phospholipases, amylases, gluco-amylases, xylanases, esterases, cutinases, pectinases, keratanases, reductases, oxidases, phenoloxidases, lipoxygenases, ligninases, pullulanases, tannases, pentosanases, malanases, β-glucanases, arabinosidases, hyaluronidases, chondroitinases, laccases, or mixtures thereof, esterases, mannanases, pectate lyases, and or mixtures thereof. Other suitable enzymes include Nuclease enzyme. The composition may comprise a nuclease enzyme. The nuclease enzyme is an enzyme capable of cleaving the phosphodiester bonds between the nucleotide sub-units of nucleic acids. The nuclease enzyme herein is preferably a deoxyribonuclease or ribonuclease enzyme or a functional fragment thereof. Enzyme selection is influenced by factors such as pH-activity and/or stability optima, thermostability, and stability to active detergents, builders, and the like.
The enzymes may be incorporated into the cleaning composition at levels from 0.0001% to 5% of active enzyme by weight of the cleaning composition. The enzymes can be added as a separate single ingredient or as mixtures of two or more enzymes.
In some embodiments, lipase may be used. Lipase may be purchased under the trade name Lipex from Novozymes (Denmark). Amylases (Natalase®, Stainzyme®, Stainzyme Plus®) may be supplied by Novozymes, Bagsvaerd, Denmark. Proteases may be supplied by Genencor International, Palo Alto, Calif., USA (e.g. Purafect Prime®) or by Novozymes, Bagsvaerd, Denmark (e.g. Liquanase®, Coronase®, Savinase®). Other preferred enzymes include pectate lyases preferably those sold under the trade names Pectawash®, Xpect®, Pectaway® and the mannanases sold under the trade names Mannaway® (all from Novozymes A/S, Bagsvaerd, Denmark), and Purabrite® (Genencor International Inc., Palo Alto, Calif.). A range of enzyme materials and means for their incorporation into synthetic cleaning compositions is disclosed in WO 9307263 A; WO 9307260 A; WO 8908694 A; U.S. Pat. Nos. 3,553,139; 4,101,457; and U.S. Pat. No. 4,507,219. Enzyme materials useful for liquid cleaning compositions, and their incorporation into such compositions, are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 4,261,868.
Enzyme Stabilizing System
The enzyme-containing compositions described herein may optionally comprise from about 0.001% to about 10%, in some examples from about 0.005% to about 8%, and in other examples, from about 0.01% to about 6%, by weight of the composition, of an enzyme stabilizing system. The enzyme stabilizing system can be any stabilizing system which is compatible with the detersive enzyme. Such a system may be inherently provided by other formulation actives, or be added separately, e.g., by the formulator or by a manufacturer of detergent-ready enzymes. Such stabilizing systems can, for example, comprise calcium ion, boric acid, propylene glycol, short chain carboxylic acids, boronic acids, chlorine bleach scavengers and mixtures thereof, and are designed to address different stabilization problems depending on the type and physical form of the cleaning composition. See U.S. Pat. No. 4,537,706 for a review of borate stabilizers.
Chelating Agent.
Preferably the composition comprises chelating agents and/or crystal growth inhibitor. Suitable molecules include copper, iron and/or manganese chelating agents and mixtures thereof. Suitable molecules include aminocarboxylates, aminophosphonates, succinates, salts thereof, and mixtures thereof. Non-limiting examples of suitable chelants for use herein include ethylenediaminetetracetates, N-(hydroxyethyl)-ethylene-diamine-triacetates, nitrilotriacetates, ethylenediamine tetraproprionates, triethylene-tetraamine-hexacetates, diethylenetriamine-pentaacetates, ethanoldiglycines, ethylenediaminetetrakis (methylenephosphonates), diethylenetriamine penta(methylene phosphonic acid) (DTPMP), ethylenediamine disuccinate (EDDS), hydroxyethanedimethylenephosphonic acid (HEDP), methylglycinediacetic acid (MGDA), diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), and 1,2-dihydroxybenzene-3,5-disulfonic acid (Tiron), salts thereof, and mixtures thereof. Tiron as well as other sulphonated catechols may also be used as effective heavy metal chelants. Other non-limiting examples of chelants of use in the present invention are found in U.S. Pat. Nos. 7,445,644, 7,585,376 and 2009/0176684A1. Other suitable chelating agents for use herein are the commercial DEQUEST series, and chelants from Monsanto, DuPont, and Nalco Inc.
Brighteners
Optical brighteners or other brightening or whitening agents may be incorporated at levels of from about 0.01% to about 1.2%, by weight of the composition, into the cleaning compositions described herein. Commercial optical brighteners, which may be used herein, can be classified into subgroups, which include, but are not necessarily limited to, derivatives of stilbene, pyrazoline, coumarin, carboxylic acid, methinecyanines, dibenzothiphene-5,5-dioxide, azoles, 5- and 6-membered-ring heterocycles, and other miscellaneous agents. Examples of such brighteners are disclosed in “The Production and Application of Fluorescent Brightening Agents,” M. Zahradnik, John Wiley & Sons, New York (1982). Specific, non-limiting examples of optical brighteners which may be useful in the present compositions are those identified in U.S. Pat. No. 4,790,856 and U.S. Pat. No. 3,646,015. Highly preferred Brighteners include Disodium 4,4'-bis{[4-anilino-6-[bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amino-s-triazin-2-yl]-amino}-2,2'-stilbenedisulfonate, 4,4'-bis{[4-anilino-6-morpholino-s-triazin-2-yl]-amino}-2,2'-stilbenedisulfonate, Disodium 4,4″-bis[(4,6-di-anilino-s-triazin-2-yl)-amino]-2,2'-stilbenedisulfonate and disodium 4,4'-bis-(2-sulfostyryl)biphenyl.
Bleaching Agents.
It may be preferred for the composition to comprise one or more bleaching agents. Suitable bleaching agents include photobleaches, hydrogen peroxide, sources of hydrogen peroxide, pre-formed peracids and mixtures thereof.
(1) photobleaches for example sulfonated zinc phthalocyanine sulfonated aluminium phthalocyanines, xanthene dyes and mixtures thereof;
(2) pre-formed peracids: Suitable preformed peracids include, but are not limited to compounds selected from the group consisting of pre-formed peroxyacids or salts thereof typically a percarboxylic acids and salts, percarbonic acids and salts, perimidic acids and salts, peroxymonosulfuric acids and salts, for example, Oxone®, and mixtures thereof. Suitable examples include peroxycarboxylic acids or salts thereof, or peroxysulphonic acids or salts thereof. Particularly preferred peroxyacids are phthalimido-peroxy-alkanoic acids, in particular ε-phthalimido peroxy hexanoic acid (PAP). Preferably, the peroxyacid or salt thereof has a melting point in the range of from 30 oC to 60 oC.
(3) sources of hydrogen peroxide, for example, inorganic perhydrate salts, including alkali metal salts such as sodium salts of perborate (usually mono- or tetra-hydrate), percarbonate, persulphate, perphosphate, persilicate salts and mixtures thereof.
Fabric Shading Dyes
The fabric shading dye (sometimes referred to as hueing, bluing or whitening agents) typically provides a blue or violet shade to fabric. Such dye(s) are well known in the art and may be used either alone or in combination to create a specific shade of hueing and/or to shade different fabric types. The fabric shading dye may be selected from any chemical class of dye as known in the art, including but not limited to acridine, anthraquinone (including polycyclic quinones), azine, azo (e.g., monoazo, disazo, trisazo, tetrakisazo, polyazo), benzodifurane, benzodifuranone, carotenoid, coumarin, cyanine, diazahemicyanine, diphenylmethane, formazan, hemicyanine, indigoids, methane, naphthalimides, naphthoquinone, nitro, nitroso, oxazine, phthalocyanine, pyrazoles, stilbene, styryl, triarylmethane, triphenylmethane, xanthenes and mixtures thereof. The amount of adjunct fabric shading dye present in a laundry care composition of the invention is typically from 0.0001 to 0.05 wt % based on the total cleaning composition, preferably from 0.0001 to 0.005 wt %. Based on the wash liquor, the concentration of fabric shading dye typically is from 1 ppb to 5 ppm, preferably from 10 ppb to 500 ppb.
Suitable fabric shading dyes include small molecule dyes, polymeric dyes and dye-clay conjugates. Preferred fabric shading dyes are selected from small molecule dyes and polymeric dyes. Suitable small molecule dyes may be selected from the group consisting of dyes falling into the Colour Index (C.I., Society of Dyers and Colourists, Bradford, UK) classifications of Acid, Direct, Basic, Reactive, Solvent or Disperse dyes.
Suitable polymeric dyes include dyes selected from the group consisting of polymers containing covalently bound (sometimes referred to as conjugated) chromogens, (also known as dye-polymer conjugates), for example polymers with chromogen monomers co-polymerized into the backbone of the polymer and mixtures thereof. Preferred polymeric dyes comprise the optionally substituted alkoxylated dyes, such as alkoxylated triphenyl-methane polymeric colourants, alkoxylated carbocyclic and alkoxylated heterocyclic azo colourants including alkoxylated thiophene polymeric colourants, and mixtures thereof, such as the fabric-substantive colorants sold under the name of Liquitint® (Milliken, Spartanburg, S.C., USA).
Suitable dye clay conjugates include dye clay conjugates selected from the group comprising at least one cationic/basic dye and a smectite clay; a preferred clay may be selected from the group consisting of Montmorillonite clay, Hectorite clay, Saponite clay and mixtures thereof.
Pigments are well known in the art and may also be used in the laundry care compositions herein. Suitable pigments include C.I Pigment Blues 15 to 20, especially 15 and/or 16, C.I. Pigment Blue 29, C.I. Pigment Violet 15, Monastral Blue and mixtures thereof.
Builders
The cleaning compositions of the present invention may optionally comprise a builder. Builders selected from aluminosilicates and silicates assist in controlling mineral hardness in wash water, or to assist in the removal of particulate soils from surfaces. Suitable builders may be selected from the group consisting of phosphates polyphosphates, especially sodium salts thereof; carbonates, bicarbonates, sesquicarbonates, and carbonate minerals other than sodium carbonate or sesquicarbonate; organic mono-, di-, tri-, and tetracarboxylates, especially water-soluble non-surfactant carboxylates in acid, sodium, potassium or alkanolammonium salt form, as well as oligomeric or water-soluble low molecular weight polymer carboxylates including aliphatic and aromatic types; and phytic acid. These may be complemented by borates, e.g., for pH-buffering purposes, or by sulfates, especially sodium sulfate and any other fillers or carriers which may be important to the engineering of stable surfactant and/or builder-containing cleaning compositions.
pH Buffer System
The compositions may also include a pH buffer system. The cleaning compositions herein may be formulated such that, during use in aqueous cleaning operations, the wash water will have a pH of between about 6.0 and about 12, and in some examples, between about 7.0 and 11. Techniques for controlling pH at recommended usage levels include the use of buffers, alkalis, or acids, and are well known to those skilled in the art. These include, but are not limited to, the use of sodium carbonate, citric acid or sodium citrate, monoethanol amine or other amines, boric acid or borates, and other pH-adjusting compounds well known in the art. The cleaning compositions herein may comprise dynamic in-wash pH profiles by delaying the release of citric acid.
Structurant/Thickeners
Structured liquids can either be internally structured, whereby the structure is formed by primary ingredients (e.g. surfactant material) and/or externally structured by providing a three dimensional matrix structure using secondary ingredients (e.g. polymers, clay and/or silicate material). The composition may comprise from about 0.01% to about 5%, by weight of the composition, of a structurant, and in some examples, from about 0.1% to about 2.0%, by weight of the composition, of a structurant. The structurant may be selected from the group consisting of diglycerides and triglycerides, ethylene glycol distearate, microcrystalline cellulose, cellulose-based materials, microfiber cellulose, biopolymers, xanthan gum, gellan gum, and mixtures thereof. In some examples, a suitable structurant includes hydrogenated castor oil, and non-ethoxylated derivatives thereof. Other suitable structurants are disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6,855,680. Such structurants have a thread-like structuring system having a range of aspect ratios. Further suitable structurants and the processes for making them are described in WO 2010/034736.
Suds Suppressors
Compounds for reducing or suppressing the formation of suds can be incorporated into the cleaning compositions described herein. Suds suppression can be of particular importance in the so-called “high concentration cleaning process” as described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4,489,455, 4,489,574, and in front-loading style washing machines.
A wide variety of materials may be used as suds suppressors, and suds suppressors are well known to those skilled in the art. See, for example, Kirk Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, Third Edition, Volume 7, pages 430-447 (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1979). Examples of suds suppressors include monocarboxylic fatty acid, and soluble salts therein, high molecular weight hydrocarbons such as paraffin, fatty acid esters (e.g., fatty acid triglycerides), fatty acid esters of monovalent alcohols, aliphatic C18-C40 ketones (e.g., stearone), N-alkylated amino triazines, waxy hydrocarbons preferably having a melting point below about 100° C., silicone suds suppressors, and secondary alcohols. Suds suppressors are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 2,954,347; 4,075,118; 4,265,779; 4,265,779; 3,455,839; 3,933,672; 4,652,392; 4,978,471; 4,983,316; 5,288,431; 4,639,489; 4,749,740; and 4,798,679.
The cleaning compositions herein may comprise from 0% to about 10%, by weight of the composition, of suds suppressor. When utilized as suds suppressors, monocarboxylic fatty acids, and salts thereof, may be present in amounts up to about 5% by weight of the cleaning composition, and in some examples, may be from about 0.5% to about 3% by weight of the cleaning composition. Silicone suds suppressors may be utilized in amounts up to about 2.0% by weight of the cleaning composition, although higher amounts may be used. Monostearyl phosphate suds suppressors may be utilized in amounts ranging from about 0.1% to about 2% by weight of the cleaning composition. Hydrocarbon suds suppressors may be utilized in amounts ranging from about 0.01% to about 5.0% by weight of the cleaning composition, although higher levels can be used. Alcohol suds suppressors may be used at about 0.2% to about 3% by weight of the cleaning composition.
Suds Boosters
If high sudsing is desired, suds boosters such as the C10-C16 alkanolamides may be incorporated into the cleaning compositions from about 1% to about 10% by weight of the cleaning composition. Some examples include the C10-C14 monoethanol and diethanol amides. If desired, water-soluble magnesium and/or calcium salts such as MgCl2, MgSO4, CaCl2, CaSO4, and the like, may be added at levels of about 0.1% to about 2% by weight of the cleaning composition, to provide additional suds and to enhance grease removal performance.
Fillers and Carriers
Fillers and carriers may be used in the cleaning compositions described herein. As used herein, the terms “filler” and “carrier” have the same meaning and can be used interchangeably. Liquid cleaning compositions, and other forms of cleaning compositions that include a liquid component (such as liquid-containing unit dose cleaning compositions), may contain water and other solvents as fillers or carriers. Low molecular weight primary or secondary alcohols exemplified by methanol, ethanol, propanol, isopropanol, and phenoxyethanol are suitable. Monohydric alcohols may be used in some examples for solubilizing surfactants, and polyols such as those containing from 2 to about 6 carbon atoms and from 2 to about 6 hydroxy groups (e.g., 1,2-propanediol, 1,3-propanediol, 2,3-butanediol, ethylene glycol, and glycerine may be used). Amine-containing solvents may also be used.
Methods of Use
The present invention includes methods for whitening fabric. Compact fluid detergent compositions that are suitable for sale to consumers are suited for use in laundry pretreatment applications, laundry cleaning applications, and home care applications. Such methods include, but are not limited to, the steps of contacting detergent compositions in neat form or diluted in wash liquor, with at least a portion of a fabric which may or may not be soiled and then optionally rinsing the fabric. The fabric material may be subjected to a washing step prior to the optional rinsing step. Machine laundry methods may comprise treating soiled laundry with an aqueous wash solution in a washing machine having dissolved or dispensed therein an effective amount of a machine laundry detergent composition in accord with the invention. An “effective amount” of the detergent composition means from about 20 g to about 300 g of product dissolved or dispersed in a wash solution of volume from about 5 L to about 65 L. The water temperatures may range from about 5° C. to about 100° C. The water to soiled material (e.g., fabric) ratio may be from about 1:1 to about 30:1. The compositions may be employed at concentrations of from about 500 ppm to about 15,000 ppm in solution. In the context of a fabric laundry composition, usage levels may also vary depending not only on the type and severity of the soils and stains, but also on the wash water temperature, the volume of wash water, and the type of washing machine (e.g., top-loading, front-loading, vertical-axis Japanese-type automatic washing machine).
The detergent compositions herein may be used for laundering of fabrics at reduced wash temperatures. These methods of laundering fabric comprise the steps of delivering a laundry detergent composition to water to form a wash liquor and adding a laundering fabric to said wash liquor, wherein the wash liquor has a temperature of from about 0° C. to about 20° C., or from about 0° C. to about 15° C., or from about 0° C. to about 9° C. The fabric may be contacted to the water prior to, or after, or simultaneous with, contacting the laundry detergent composition with water. Another method includes contacting a nonwoven substrate, which is impregnated with the detergent composition, with a soiled material. As used herein, “nonwoven substrate” can comprise any conventionally fashioned nonwoven sheet or web having suitable basis weight, caliper (thickness), absorbency, and strength characteristics. Non-limiting examples of suitable commercially available nonwoven substrates include those marketed under the trade names SONTARA® by DuPont and POLY WEB® by James River Corp.
Hand washing/soak methods, and combined hand washing with semi-automatic washing machines, are also included.
Packaging for the Compositions
The cleaning compositions described herein can be packaged in any suitable container including those constructed from paper, cardboard, plastic materials, and any suitable laminates. An optional packaging type is described in European Application No. 94921505.7.
Multi-Compartment Pouch
The cleaning compositions described herein may also be packaged as a multi-compartment cleaning composition.
Other Adjunct Ingredients
A wide variety of other ingredients may be used in the cleaning compositions herein, including, for example, other active ingredients, carriers, hydrotropes, processing aids, dyes or pigments, solvents for liquid formulations, solid or other liquid fillers, erythrosine, colloidal silica, waxes, probiotics, surfactin, aminocellulosic polymers, Zinc Ricinoleate, perfume microcapsules, rhamnolipids, sophorolipids, glycopeptides, methyl ester ethoxylates, sulfonated estolides, cleavable surfactants, biopolymers, silicones, modified silicones, aminosilicones, deposition aids, hydrotropes (especially cumene-sulfonate salts, toluene-sulfonate salts, xylene-sulfonate salts, and naphalene salts), PVA particle-encapsulated dyes or perfumes, pearlescent agents, effervescent agents, color change systems, silicone polyurethanes, opacifiers, tablet disintegrants, biomass fillers, fast-dry silicones, glycol distearate, starch perfume encapsulates, emulsified oils including hydrocarbon oils, polyolefins, and fatty esters, bisphenol antioxidants, micro-fibrous cellulose structurants, properfumes, styrene/acrylate polymers, triazines, soaps, superoxide dismutase, benzophenone protease inhibitors, functionalized TiO2, dibutyl phosphate, silica perfume capsules, and other adjunct ingredients, choline oxidase, triarylmethane blue and violet basic dyes, methine blue and violet basic dyes, anthraquinone blue and violet basic dyes, azo dyes basic blue 16, basic blue 65, basic blue 66 basic blue 67, basic blue 71, basic blue 159, basic violet 19, basic violet 35, basic violet 38, basic violet 48, oxazine dyes, basic blue 3, basic blue 75, basic blue 95, basic blue 122, basic blue 124, basic blue 141, Nile blue A and xanthene dye basic violet 10, an alkoxylated triphenylmethane polymeric colorant; an alkoxylated thiopene polymeric colorant; thiazolium dye, mica, titanium dioxide coated mica, bismuth oxychloride, and other actives.
Anti-oxidant: The composition may optionally contain an anti-oxidant present in the composition from about 0.001 to about 2% by weight. Preferably the antioxidant is present at a concentration in the range 0.01 to 0.08% by weight. Mixtures of anti-oxidants may be used.
One class of anti-oxidants used in the present invention is alkylated phenols. Hindered phenolic compounds are a preferred type of alkylated phenols having this formula. A preferred hindered phenolic compound of this type is 3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxytoluene (BHT).
Furthermore, the anti-oxidant used in the composition may be selected from the group consisting of α-, β-, γ-, δ-tocopherol, ethoxyquin, 2,2,4-trimethyl-1,2-dihydroquinoline, 2,6-di-tert-butyl hydroquinone, tert-butyl hydroxyanisole, lignosulphonic acid and salts thereof, and mixtures thereof.
The cleaning compositions described herein may also contain vitamins and amino acids such as: water soluble vitamins and their derivatives, water soluble amino acids and their salts and/or derivatives, water insoluble amino acids viscosity modifiers, dyes, nonvolatile solvents or diluents (water soluble and insoluble), pearlescent aids, pediculocides, pH adjusting agents, preservatives, skin active agents, sunscreens, UV absorbers, niacinamide, caffeine, and minoxidil.
The cleaning compositions of the present invention may also contain pigment materials such as nitroso, monoazo, disazo, carotenoid, triphenyl methane, triaryl methane, xanthene, quinoline, oxazine, azine, anthraquinone, indigoid, thionindigoid, quinacridone, phthalocianine, botanical, and natural colors, including water soluble components such as those having C.I. Names.
The cleaning compositions of the present invention may also contain antimicrobial agents. Cationic active ingredients may include but are not limited to n-alkyl dimethyl benzyl ammonium chloride, alkyl dimethyl ethyl benzyl ammonium chloride, dialkyl dimethyl quaternary ammonium compounds such as didecyl dimethyl ammonium chloride, N,N-didecyl-Nmethyl-poly(oxyethyl) ammonium propionate, dioctyl didecyl ammonium chloride, also including quaternary species such as benzethonium chloride and quaternary ammonium compounds with inorganic or organic counter ions such as bromine, carbonate or other moieties including dialkyl dimethyl ammonium carbonates, as well as antimicrobial amines such as Chlorhexidine Gluconate, PHMB (Polyhexamethylene biguanide), salt of a biguanide, a substituted biguanide derivative, an organic salt of a quaternary ammonium containing compound or an inorganic salt of a quaternary ammonium containing compound or mixtures thereof.
In one aspect, such method comprises the steps of optionally washing and/or rinsing said surface or fabric, contacting said surface or fabric with any composition disclosed in this specification then optionally washing and/or rinsing said surface or fabric is disclosed, with an optional drying step.
Drying of such surfaces or fabrics may be accomplished by any one of the common means employed either in domestic or industrial settings. The fabric may comprise any fabric capable of being laundered in normal consumer or institutional use conditions, and the invention is suitable for cellulosic substrates and in some aspects also suitable for synthetic textiles such as polyester and nylon and for treatment of mixed fabrics and/or fibers comprising synthetic and cellulosic fabrics and/or fibers. As examples of synthetic fabrics are polyester, nylon, these may be present in mixtures with cellulosic fibers, for example, polycotton fabrics. The solution typically has a pH of from 7 to 11, more usually 8 to 10.5. The compositions are typically employed at concentrations from 500 ppm to 5,000 ppm in solution. The water temperatures typically range from about 5° C. to about 90° C. The water to fabric ratio is typically from about 1:1 to about 30:1.
Thus, in a third embodiment, the invention provides a method of treating a textile. The method preferably comprises the steps of (i) treating a textile with an aqueous solution containing a leuco composition as described herein, (ii) optionally, rinsing the textile, and (iii) drying the textile. In one aspect, the invention provides a method of treating a textile comprising the steps of: (i) treating a textile with an aqueous solution containing a leuco composition as described herein, the aqueous solution comprising from 10 ppb to 5000 ppm of at least one reactive leuco compound and from 0.0 g/L to 3 g/L of a surfactant; (ii) optionally rinsing; and (iii) drying the textile. The leuco composition and/or reactive leuco colorant utilized in this method can be any of the leuco compositions and reactive leuco colorants described herein. Further, the aqueous solution utilized in the method can be created by adding a leuco composition directly to an aqueous medium or by adding a laundry care composition containing a leuco composition to an aqueous medium.
EXAMPLES
Preparation of Leuco Monomers
Leuco alcohol 3: A solution of 4,4'-bis(dimethylamino)benzhydrol (1) (0.27 g, 1.0 mmol), 2-(methylphenylamino)ethanol (2) (0.18 g, 1.2 mmol), and p-toluenesulfonic acid (pTSA) monohydrate (0.76 g, 4 mmol) in methanol (25 mL) is stirred at reflux with a Dean-Stark trap for 9 h. The mixture is diluted with methylene chloride and washed three times with aq. sodium bicarbonate. The organic layer is dried over anhydrous MgSO4 and filtered. The filtrate is concentrated in vacuo to give a residue which is purified by column chromatography on silica gel (1:1 ethyl acetate/hexane) to yield the leuco alcohol intermediate 3.
Preparation of Reactive Leuco Compounds
Reactive Leuco 4: A solution of dry toluene (10 mL) and diphosgene (0.4 g, 2.0 mmol) is cooled to 0-5° C. in an ice bath. A solution of intermediate 3 (1.05 g, 2.55 mmol) and triethylamine (0.77 g, 7.65 mmol) in dry toluene (15 mL) is added dropwise to the diphosgene solution over 15 minutes, keeping the temperature <5° C. The reaction mixture is allowed to react at 0-5° C. for 4 hours, then allowed to warm to room temperature overnight. The toluene is removed on the rotovap to dryness to yield reactive leuco 4.
Reactive Leuco 5: To a solution of intermediate 3 (5.0 g, 12.4 mmol) in dichloromethane (30 mL) at 0-5° C. is added triethylamine (1.25 g, 12.4 mmol) followed by the slow addition of p-toluenesulfonyl chloride (2.4 g, 12.6 mmol). The reaction mixture is allowed to warm to room temperature overnight. Reaction progress is monitored by TLC (2:1 EtOAc/MeOH). Once complete, the reaction mixture is diluted with water (50 mL) and then 10% sodium bicarbonate solution (50 mL) is added. The layers are separated and the aqueous is extracted twice with 1,2-dichloroethane. The combined organic layers are washed with water, dried (Na2SO4), filtered and concentrated to yield reactive leuco 5.
Reactive Leuco 6: To 80 mL of acetone in 250 mL four neck flask fitted with stirrer temperature probe, dropping funnel and N2 outlet, cyanuric chloride (6.35 g, 0.035 mole) was charged. The solution mixture was heated at 70° C. for 45 minutes to dissolve and subsequently cooled to 0 to 10° C. A dropwise solution of 3 (10.0 g, 0.025 mole in 40 mL of acetone) was added to the reaction mixture. After addition, the reaction was allowed to stir at room temperature for 4 hours and then refluxed for one hour and left at room temperature overnight. TLC indicated formation of product. The reaction mixture was filtered and solid was collected. Product was characterized by NMR and mass spectrometry m/z peak at 550 and 551.
Reactive Leuco 7: Compound 3 (10.0 g, 0.025 mole) was added to acetonitrile (60 mL) and THF (10 mL) in 150 mL 3-neck flask fitted with stirrer, temperature probe, and N2 outlet. To the reaction flask sulfamic acid. (5.05 g, 0.052 mole) was added and the reaction mixture was heated at 70° C. for 10 hours. The reaction mixture was filtered and the excess solvent was removed in rotory evaporator. The product was characterized using NMR and mass spectrometry m/z at 483.
Application Example
Reactive Leuco compounds 6 and 7, along with a hydrolyzed form of each (structure 8 and structure 3 above, respectively), were tested for ability to deliver a whiteness benefit increase as described in Method I below with the following changes: (a) Two swatches of MultiFiber Fabric (MFF41, TestFabrics, Inc. West Pittston, Pa.) were used per flask; (b) The base wash solution is dosed with the leuco compound stock to achieve a wash solution with a concentration of 5.0×10−6 mole/L; (c) L*, a*, b* and Whiteness Index (WI CIE) values for the cotton, nylon and polyester sections of the MFF41 fabric swatches were measured on the dry swatches 24 hours following the drying procedure using a color spectrophotometer (X-rite Color i7) with reflectance mode (UV light excluded). The calculated values of δΔWI CIE at 24 hours are given in the table below for each of the three fabrics.
<table>
<header>
 & 
</header>
<header>
 & Leuco Compound & Cotton & Nylon & Polyester
</header>
<header>
 & 
</header>
 & 6 & 1.22 & −0.09 & 1.40
 & 8 & 1.45 & 0.01 & 1.13
 & 7 & 4.34 & 1.44 & 1.20
 & 3 & 3.87 & 0.18 & 1.87
 & 
</table>
The data show each leuco material delivers an improvement in the WI CIE value on cotton and polyester relative to the nil-leuco control. In addition, benefits are observed for some samples on nylon.
Test Methods
Fabric swatches used in the test methods herein are obtained from Testfabrics, Inc. West Pittston, Pa., and are 100% Cotton, Style 403 (cut to 2″×2″) and/or Style 464 (cut to 4″×6″), and an unbrightened multifiber fabric, specifically Style 41 (5 cm×10 cm).
All reflectance spectra and color measurements, including L*, a*, b*, K/S, and Whiteness Index (WI CIE) values on dry fabric swatches, are made using one of four spectrophotometers: (1) a Konica-Minolta 3610d reflectance spectrophotometer (Konica Minolta Sensing Americas, Inc., Ramsey, N.J., USA; D65 illumination, 10° observer, UV light excluded), (2) a LabScan XE reflectance spectrophotometer (HunterLabs, Reston, Va.; D65 illumination, 10° observer, UV light excluded), (3) a Color-Eye® 7000A (GretagMacbeth, New Windsor, N.Y., USA; D65 light, UV excluded), or (4) a Color i7 spectrophotometer (X-rite, Inc., Grand Rapids, Mich., USA; D65 light, UV excluded).
Where fabrics are irradiated, unless otherwise indicated, the specified fabrics post-dry are exposed to simulated sunlight with irradiance of 0.77 W/m2 @ 420 nm in an Atlas Xenon Fade-Ometer Ci3000+ (Atlas Material Testing Technology, Mount Prospect, Ill., USA) equipped with Type S Borosilicate inner (Part no. 20277300) and outer (Part no. 20279600) filters, set at 37° C. maximum cabinet temperature, 57° C. maximum black panel temperature (BPT black panel geometry), and 35% RH (relative humidity). Unless otherwise indicated, irradiation is continuous over the stated duration.
I. Method for Determining Leuco Compound Efficiency from a Wash Solution
Cotton swatches (Style 403) are stripped prior to use by washing at 49° C. two times with heavy duty liquid laundry detergent nil brightener (1.55 g/L in aqueous solution). A concentrated stock solution of each leuco compound to be tested is prepared in a solvent selected from ethanol or 50:50 ethanol:water, preferably ethanol.
A base wash solution is prepared by dissolving heavy duty liquid laundry detergent nil brightener (5.23 g/1.0 L) in deionized water. Four stripped cotton swatches are weighed together and placed in a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask along with two 10 mm glass marbles. A total of three such flasks are prepared for each wash solution to be tested. The base wash solution is dosed with the leuco compound stock to achieve a wash solution with the desired 1.0 ppm wash concentration of the leuco compound.
An aliquot of this wash solution sufficient to provide a 10.0:1.0 liquor:fabric (w/w) ratio is placed into each of the three 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks. Each flask is dosed with a 1000 gpg stock hardness solution to achieve a final wash hardness of 6 gpg (3:1 Ca:Mg).
The flasks are placed on a Model 75 wrist action shaker (Burrell Scientific, Inc., Pittsburg, Pa.) and agitated at the maximum setting for 12 minutes, after which the wash solution is removed by aspiration, a volume of rinse water (0 gpg) equivalent to the amount of wash solution used is added. Each flask is dosed with a 1000 gpg stock hardness solution to achieve a final rinse hardness of 6 gpg (3:1 Ca:Mg) before agitating 4 more minutes. The rinse is removed by aspiration and the fabric swatches are spun dry (Mini Countertop Spin Dryer, The Laundry Alternative Inc., Nashua, N.H.) for 1 minute, then placed in a food dehydrator set at 135° F. to dry in the dark for 2 hours.
A. Dark Conditions Post-Dry
L*, a*, b* and Whiteness Index (WI CIE) values for the cotton fabrics are measured on the dry swatches 48 hours following the drying procedure using a LabScan XE reflectance spectrophotometer. The L*, a*, and b* values of the 12 swatches generated for each leuco compound (three flasks with four swatches each) are averaged and the leuco compound efficiency (LCE) of each leuco compound is calculated using the following equation:
<in-line-formulae>LCE=DE*=[(L*c−L*s)2+(a*c−a*s)2+(b*c−b*s)2]1/2 </in-line-formulae>
wherein the subscripts c and s respectively refer to the control, i.e., the fabric washed in detergent with no leuco compound, and the sample, i.e., the fabric washed in detergent containing leuco compound.
The WI CIE values of the 12 swatches generated for each wash solution (three flasks with four swatches each) are averaged and the change in whiteness index on washing is calculated using the following equation:
<in-line-formulae>ΔWI=WI CIE (after wash)−WI CIE (before wash)</in-line-formulae>
B. Light Conditions Post-Dry
Because consumer habits vary greatly throughout the world, the methods used must allow for the possibility of measuring the benefits of leuco compounds across conditions. One such condition is the exposure to light following drying. Some leuco compounds will not exhibit as large a benefit under dark storage as under light storage, so each leuco compound must be tested under both sets of conditions to determine the optimum benefit. Therefore Method I includes exposure of the dried fabrics to simulated sunlight for various increments of time before measurements are taken, and the LCE value is set to the maximum value obtained from the set of exposure times described below.
The specified cotton fabrics post-dry are exposed to simulated sunlight for 15 min, 30 min, 45 min, 60 min, 75 min, 90 min, 120 min, and 240 min. The L*, a*, b* and Whiteness Index (WI CIE) values for the cotton fabrics are measured on the swatches after each exposure period using a LabScan XE reflectance spectrophotometer. The calculation of the LCE and the ΔWI value at each exposure time point is as described in Method I.A. above, and the LCE value and the ΔWI value for the leuco compound are set to the maximum values obtained from the set of exposure times listed.
II. Method for Determining Relative Hue Angle (vs. Nil Leuco Compound)
The relative hue angle delivered by a leuco compound to cotton fabrics treated according to Method I described above is determined as follows.a) The a* and b* values of the 12 swatches from each solution are averaged and the following formulas used to determine Δa* and Δb*:
<in-line-formulae>Δa*=a*s−a*c and Δb*=b*s−b*c </in-line-formulae>wherein the subscripts c and s respectively refer to the fabric washed in detergent with no leuco compound and the fabric washed in detergent containing leuco compound.b) If the absolute value of both Δa* and Δb*<0.25, no Relative Hue Angle (RHA) is calculated. If the absolute value of either Δa* or Δb* is ≥0.25, the RHA is determined using one of the following formulas:
<in-line-formulae>RHA=A TAN 2(Δa*,Δb*) for Δb*≥0</in-line-formulae>
<in-line-formulae>RHA=360+A TAN 2(Δa*,Δb*) for Δb*<0</in-line-formulae>
A relative hue angle can be calculated for each time point where data is collected in either the dark post-dry or light post-dry assessments. Any of these points may be used to satisfy the requirements of a claim.
III. Method for Determining Change in Whiteness Index for a Laundry Care Formulation
Cotton swatches (Style 403) are stripped prior to use by washing at 49° C. two times with heavy duty liquid laundry detergent nil brightener (1.55 g/L in aqueous solution).
A base wash solution is prepared by dissolving the laundry care formulation (5.23 g/1.0 L) in deionized water. Four stripped cotton swatches are weighed together and placed in a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask along with two 10 mm glass marbles. A total of three such flasks are prepared.
An aliquot of this wash solution sufficient to provide a 10.0:1.0 liquor:fabric (w/w) ratio is placed into each of the three 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks. Each flask is dosed with a 1000 gpg stock hardness solution to achieve a final wash hardness of 6 gpg (3:1 Ca:Mg).
The flasks are placed on a Model 75 wrist action shaker (Burrell Scientific, Inc., Pittsburg, Pa.) and agitated at the maximum setting for 12 minutes, after which the wash solution is removed by aspiration, a volume of rinse water (0 gpg) equivalent to the amount of wash solution used is added. Each flask is dosed with a 1000 gpg stock hardness solution to achieve a final rinse hardness of 6 gpg (3:1 Ca:Mg) before agitating 4 more minutes. The rinse is removed by aspiration and the fabric swatches are spun dry (Mini Countertop Spin Dryer, The Laundry Alternative Inc., Nashua, N.H.) for 1 minute, then placed in a food dehydrator set at 135° F. to dry in the dark for 2 hours.
L*, a*, b* and Whiteness Index (WI CIE) values for the cotton fabrics are measured on the dry swatches, according to Method I.A. and/or I.B. above, using a LabScan XE reflectance spectrophotometer. The WI CIE values of the 12 swatches generated for the laundry care formulation (three flasks with four swatches each) are averaged and the change in whiteness index on washing is calculated using the following equation:
<in-line-formulae>ΔWI=WI CIE (after wash)−WI CIE (before wash)</in-line-formulae>
Formulation Examples
The following are illustrative examples of cleaning compositions according to the present disclosure and are not intended to be limiting.
Examples 1-7
Heavy Duty Liquid Laundry Detergent Compositions
<table>
 & 
 & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & 7
Ingredients & % weight
AE1.8S & 6.77 & 5.16 & 1.36 & 1.30 & - & - & -
AE3S & - & - & - & - & 0.45 & - & -
LAS & 0.86 & 2.06 & 2.72 & 0.68 & 0.95 & 1.56 & 3.55
HSAS & 1.85 & 2.63 & 1.02 & - & - & - & -
AE9 & 6.32 & 9.85 & 10.20 & 7.92
AE8 &  &  &  &  &  &  & 35.45
AE7 &  &  &  &  & 8.40 & 12.44
C12-14 dimethyl Amine Oxide & 0.30 & 0.73 & 0.23 & 0.37 & - & - & -
C12-18 Fatty Acid & 0.80 & 1.90 & 0.60 & 0.99 & 1.20 & - & 15.00
Citric Acid & 2.50 & 3.96 & 1.88 & 1.98 & 0.90 & 2.50 & 0.60
Optical Brightener 1 & 1.00 & 0.80 & 0.10 & 0.30 & 0.05 & 0.50 & 0.001
Optical Brightener 3 & 0.001 & 0.05 & 0.01 & 0.20 & 0.50 & - & 1.00
Sodium formate & 1.60 & 0.09 & 1.20 & 0.04 & 1.60 & 1.20 & 0.20
DTI & 0.32 & 0.05 & - & 0.60 & - & 0.60 & 0.01
Sodium hydroxide & 2.30 & 3.80 & 1.70 & 1.90 & 1.70 & 2.50 & 2.30
Monoethanolamine & 1.40 & 1.49 & 1.00 & 0.70 & - & - & -
Diethylene glycol & 5.50 & - & 4.10 & - & - & - & -
Chelant 1 & 0.15 & 0.15 & 0.11 & 0.07 & 0.50 & 0.11 & 0.80
4-formyl-phenylboronic acid & - & - & - & - & 0.05 & 0.02 & 0.01
Sodium tetraborate & 1.43 & 1.50 & 1.10 & 0.75 & - & 1.07 & -
Ethanol & 1.54 & 1.77 & 1.15 & 0.89 & - & 3.00 & 7.00
Polymer 1 & 0.10 & - & - & - & - & - & 2.00
Polymer 2 & 0.30 & 0.33 & 0.23 & 0.17 & - & - & -
Polymer 3 & - & - & - & - & - & - & 0.80
Polymer 4 & 0.80 & 0.81 & 0.60 & 0.40 & 1.00 & 1.00 & -
1,2-Propanediol & - & 6.60 & - & 3.30 & 0.50 & 2.00 & 8.00
Structurant & 0.10 & - & - & - & - & - & 0.10
Perfume & 1.60 & 1.10 & 1.00 & 0.80 & 0.90 & 1.50 & 1.60
Perfume encapsulate & 0.10 & 0.05 & 0.01 & 0.02 & 0.10 & 0.05 & 0.10
Protease & 0.80 & 0.60 & 0.70 & 0.90 & 0.70 & 0.60 & 1.50
Mannanase & 0.07 & 0.05 & 0.045 & 0.06 & 0.04 & 0.045 & 0.10
Amylase 1 & 0.30 & - & 0.30 & 0.10 & - & 0.40 & 0.10
Amylase 2 & - & 0.20 & 0.10 & 0.15 & 0.07 & - & 0.10
Xyloglucanase & 0.20 & 0.10 & - & - & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.20
Lipase & 0.40 & 0.20 & 0.30 & 0.10 & 0.20 & - & -
Polishing enzyme & - & 0.04 & - & - & - & 0.004 & -
Nuclease & 0.05 & - & - & - & - & - & 0.003
Dispersin B & - & - & - & 0.05 & 0.03 & 0.001 & 0.001
Liquitint ® V200 & 0.01 & - & - & - & - & - & 0.005
Leuco compound & 0.5 & 0.35 & 0.1 & 0.2 & 0.04 & 0.02 & 0.04
Dye control agent & - & 0.3 & - & 0.03 & - & 0.3 & 0.3
Water, dyes & minors & Balance
pH & 8.2
Based on total cleaning and/or treatment composition weight. Enzyme levels are reported as raw material.
</table>
Examples 8 to 18
Unit Dose Compositions
These examples provide various formulations for unit dose laundry detergents. Compositions 8 to 12 comprise a single unit dose compartment. The film used to encapsulate the compositions is polyvinyl-alcohol-based film.
<table>
 & 
 & 8 & 9 & 10 & 11 & 12
Ingredients & % weight
LAS & 19.09 & 16.76 & 8.59 & 6.56 & 3.44
AE3S & 1.91 & 0.74 & 0.18 & 0.46 & 0.07
AE7 & 14.00 & 17.50 & 26.33 & 28.08 & 31.59
Citric Acid & 0.6 & 0.6 & 0.6 & 0.6 & 0.6
C12-15 Fatty Acid & 14.8 & 14.8 & 14.8 & 14.8 & 14.8
Polymer 3 & 4.0 & 4.0 & 4.0 & 4.0 & 4.0
Chelant 2 & 1.2 & 1.2 & 1.2 & 1.2 & 1.2
Optical Brightener 1 & 0.20 & 0.25 & 0.01 & 0.01 & 0.50
Optical Brightener 2 & 0.20 & - & 0.25 & 0.03 & 0.01
Optical Brightener 3 & 0.18 & 0.09 & 0.30 & 0.01 & -
DTI & 0.10 & - & 0.20 & - & -
Glycerol & 6.1 & 6.1 & 6.1 & 6.1 & 6.1
Monoethanol amine & 8.0 & 8.0 & 8.0 & 8.0 & 8.0
Tri-isopropanol amine & - & - & 2.0 & - & -
Tri-ethanol amine & - & 2.0 & - & - & -
Cumene sulfonate & - & - & - & - & 2.0
Protease & 0.80 & 0.60 & 0.07 & 1.00 & 1.50
Mannanase & 0.07 & 0.05 & 0.05 & 0.10 & 0.01
Amylase 1 & 0.20 & 0.11 & 0.30 & 0.50 & 0.05
Amylase 2 & 0.11 & 0.20 & 0.10 & - & 0.50
Polishing enzyme & 0.005 & 0.05 & - & - & -
Nuclease & 0.- & 0.05 & - & - & 0.005
Dispersin B & 0.010 & 0.05 & 0.005 & 0.005 & -
Cyclohexyl dimethanol & - & - & - & 2.0 & -
Leuco compound & 0.6 & 0.3 & 1.0 & 0.1 & 0.4
Liquitint ® V200 & - & - & 0.01 & 0.05 & -
Structurant & 0.14 & 0.14 & 0.14 & 0.14 & 0.14
Perfume & 1.9 & 1.9 & 1.9 & 1.9 & 1.9
Dye control agent & 0.1 & 0.3 & 0.2 & 0.5 & 0.3
Water and miscellaneous & To 100%
pH & 7.5-8.2
Based on total cleaning and/or treatment composition weight. Enzyme levels are reported as raw material.
</table>
In the following examples the unit dose has three compartments, but similar compositions can be made with two, four or five compartments. The film used to encapsulate the compartments is polyvinyl alcohol.
<table>
<header>
 & 
</header>
 & Base compositions
 & 13 & 14 & 15 & 16
Ingredients & % weight
HLAS & 26.82 & 16.35 & 7.50 & 3.34
AE7 & 17.88 & 16.35 & 22.50 & 30.06
Citric Acid & 0.5 & 0.7 & 0.6 & 0.5
C12-15 Fatty acid & 16.4 & 6.0 & 11.0 & 13.0
Polymer 1 & 2.9 & 0.1 & - & -
Polymer 3 & 1.1 & 5.1 & 2.5 & 4.2
Cationic cellulose polymer & - & - & 0.3 & 0.5
Polymer 6 & - & 1.5 & 0.3 & 0.2
Chelant 2 & 1.1 & 2.0 & 0.6 & 1.5
Optical Brightener 1 & 0.20 & 0.25 & 0.01 & 0.005
Optical Brightener 3 & 0.18 & 0.09 & 0.30 & 0.005
DTI & 0.1 & - & 0.05 & -
Glycerol & 5.3 & 5.0 & 5.0 & 4.2
Monoethanolamine & 10.0 & 8.1 & 8.4 & 7.6
Polyethylene glycol & - & - & 2.5 & 3.0
Potassium sulfite & 0.2 & 0.3 & 0.5 & 0.7
Protease & 0.80 & 0.60 & 0.40 & 0.80
Amylase 1 & 0.20 & 0.20 & 0.200 & 0.30
Polishing enzyme & - & - & 0.005 & 0.005
Nuclease & 0.05 & - & - & -
Dispersin B & - & 0.010 & 0.010 & 0.010
MgCl2 & 0.2 & 0.2 & 0.1 & 0.3
Structurant & 0.2 & 0.1 & 0.2 & 0.2
Acid Violet 50 & 0.04 & 0.03 & 0.05 & 0.03
Perfume/encapsulates & 0.10 & 0.30 & 0.01 & 0.05
Dye control agent & 0.2 & 0.03 & 0.4 & -
Solvents and misc. & To 100%
pH & 7.0-8.2
 & Finishing compositions
 & 17 & 18
 & Compartment
 & A & B & C & A & B & C
 & Volume of each compartment
 & 40 ml & 5 ml & 5 ml & 40 ml & 5 ml & 5 ml
Ingredients & Active material in Wt. %
Perfume & 1.6 & 1.6 & 1.6 & 1.6 & 1.6 & 1.6
Liquitint ® V200 & 0 & 0.006 & 0 & 0 & 0.004 & -
Leuco compound &  & 0.2 &  & 0.4 & - & -
TiO2 & - & - & 0.1 & - &  & 0.1
Sodium Sulfite & 0.4 & 0.4 & 0.4 & 0.1 & 0.3 & 0.3
Polymer 5 & - &  &  & 2 & - & -
Hydrogenated castor oil & 0.14 & 0.14 & 0.14 & 0.14 & 0.14 & 0.14
Base Composition 13, 14, 15 & Add to 100%
or 16
Based on total cleaning and/or treatment composition weight, enzyme levels are reported as raw material.
</table>
<table>
<header>

</header>
AE1.8S & is C12-15 alkyl ethoxy (1.8) sulfate
AE3S & is C12-15 alkyl ethoxy (3) sulfate
AE7 & is C12-13 alcohol ethoxylate, with an average degree of ethoxylation
 & of 7
AE8 & is C12-13 alcohol ethoxylate, with an average degree of ethoxylation
 & of 8
AE9 & is C12-13 alcohol ethoxylate, with an average degree of ethoxylation
 & of 9
Amylase 1 & is Stainzyme ®, 15 mg active/g, supplied by Novozymes
Amylase 2 & is Natalase ®, 29 mg active/g, supplied by Novozymes
Xyloglucanase & is Whitezyme ®, 20 mg active/g, supplied by Novozymes
Chelant 1 & is diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid
Chelant 2 & is 1-hydroxyethane 1,1-diphosphonic acid
Dispersin B & is a glycoside hydrolase, reported as 1000 mg active/g
DTI & is either poly(4-vinylpyridine-1-oxide) (such as Chromabond S-
 & 403E ®), or poly(1-vinylpyrrolidone-co-1-vinylimidazole) (such as
 & Sokalan HP56 ®).
Dye control agent & Dye control agent in accordance with the invention, for example
 & Suparex ® O.IN (M1), Nylofixan ® P (M2), Nylofixan ® PM (M3), or
 & Nylofixan ® HF (M4)
HSAS & is mid-branched alkyl sulfate as disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6,020,303 and
 & U.S. Pat. No. 6,060,443
LAS & is linear alkylbenzenesulfonate having an average aliphatic carbon
 & chain length C9-C15 (HLAS is acid form).
Leuco colorant & Any suitable leuco colorant or mixtures thereof according to the
 & instant invention.
Lipase & is Lipex ®, 18 mg active/g, supplied by Novozymes
Liquitint ® V200 & is a thiophene azo dye provided by Milliken
Mannanase & is Mannaway ®, 25 mg active/g, supplied by Novozymes
Nuclease & is a Phosphodiesterase SEQ ID NO 1, reported as 1000 mg active/g
Optical Brightener 1 & is disodium 4,4'-bis{[4-anilino-6-morpholino-s-triazin-2-yl]-amino}-
 & 2,2'-stilbenedisulfonate
Optical Brightener 2 & is disodium 4,4'-bis-(2-sulfostyryl)biphenyl (sodium salt)
Optical Brightener 3 & is Optiblanc SPL10 ® from 3V Sigma
Perfume encapsulate & is a core-shell melamine formaldehyde perfume microcapsules.
Polishing enzyme & is Para-nitrobenzyl esterase, reported as 1000 mg active/g
Polymer 1 & is bis((C2H5O)(C2H4O)n)(CH3)-N+-CxH2x-N+-(CH3)-
 & bis((C2H5O)(C2H4O)n), wherein n = 20-30, x = 3 to 8 or sulphated or
 & sulfonated variants thereof
Polymer 2 & is ethoxylated (EO15) tetraethylene pentamine
Polymer 3 & is ethoxylated polyethylenimine
Polymer 4 & is ethoxylated hexamethylene diamine
Polymer 5 & is Acusol 305, provided by Rohm&Haas
Polymer 6 & is a polyethylene glycol polymer grafted with vinyl acetate side
 & chains, provided by BASF.
Protease & is Purafect Prime ®, 40.6 mg active/g, supplied by DuPont
Structurant & is Hydrogenated Castor Oil
</table>
The dimensions and values disclosed herein are not to be understood as being strictly limited to the exact numerical values recited. Instead, unless otherwise specified, each such dimension is intended to mean both the recited value and a functionally equivalent range surrounding that value. For example, a dimension disclosed as “40 mm” is intended to mean “about 40 mm.”
Every document cited herein, including any cross referenced or related patent or application and any patent application or patent to which this application claims priority or benefit thereof, is hereby incorporated herein by reference in its entirety unless expressly excluded or otherwise limited. The citation of any document is not an admission that it is prior art with respect to any invention disclosed or claimed herein or that it alone, or in any combination with any other reference or references, teaches, suggests or discloses any such invention. Further, to the extent that any meaning or definition of a term in this document conflicts with any meaning or definition of the same term in a document incorporated by reference, the meaning or definition assigned to that term in this document shall govern.
While particular embodiments of the present invention have been illustrated and described, it would be obvious to those skilled in the art that various other changes and modifications can be made without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. It is therefore intended to cover in the appended claims all such changes and modifications that are within the scope of this invention.